Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Community Banking in the 21st Century" 2019 Community Banking Research and Policy Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri It is a special honor for me to be part of this conference and its tradition of advancing our understanding of how banking shapes our economy and our communities.1As a community banker, I sought out actionable research that I could leverage to better serve my customers and my community. As a state bank regulator, I conducted my own research to answer questions about issues affecting the banks my agency regulated. I also appreciated learning what researchers thought would provide better insight into the industry. Today I am honored to be here as the first person to serve on the Federal Reserve Board in the role that the Congress designated for someone with community banking or state supervisory experience. My work at the Board has given me an even greater appreciation for how creative, insightful research informs and shapes policy decisions that support our economy. But it also tells me there is still much to be learned and many additional areas that deserve more exploration. More than 10 years on, as the entire banking industry continues to evolve post-crisis, I would like to share with you some of my thoughts and observations on the forces influencing the future of banking, and community banking in particular. I will also suggest some areas where policymakers could use the help of researchers, bankers, and state supervisors to better understand how community banking is changing and how we can better provide a path for the continued viability of this sector and its business model. I hardly need to tell this audience that community banks play a vital role in the financial services industry and in the economy. From my perspective, the Federal Reserve supports community banks as a central component of a strong, resilient, and stable financial system. Our system is made more resilient through a broad and varied range of institutions serving different types of customers, with community banks providing access to credit and other financial services in towns and cities across America. With the support of community bankers, these investments are the building blocks of a strong community and help support a vibrant economy across the country—from here in the Midwest to the coasts on either side. Research on community banking and the accessibility of financial services is incredibly important. Community bankers and policymakers want to better understand how technology, competition, regulation, and other factors are driving decision making, consolidation, and the other challenges and opportunities that are shaping community banking. Existing research provides us with some answers to these questions, but there are many gaps. The lack of a full understanding of these institutions, their functionality, and their needs may limit our ability to identify important areas of focus for research. This is where I would like to ask for your expertise and assistance. We need to challenge ourselves to tackle some questions and issues that have not been fully explored by researchers. If you are a community banker, are involved in economic development or city or county management, or live in a community served by a community bank, your own experiences likely provide anecdotal evidence regarding the answers to these questions, but research can provide more comprehensive and systematic evidence, leading to more definitive answers. So I need your help. To begin, let's look at the questions. Community banks provide a variety of benefits to their communities, but these benefits can be difficult to quantify and measure. Therefore, economists and policymakers would like to be able to define and understand the full economic effects of a community bank in an area that relies on it and identify the different channels by which a community bank finances spending, investment, economic development, and job creation. In addition, what happens to a community when a bank headquartered or chartered in that community is acquired by a financial institution located elsewhere? Can we calculate the cumulative contribution of community banks to U.S. investment, employment, and economic output? I hope that presentations at future community banking research conferences can help answer some of these questions and provide a stronger foundation for policy development. Perhaps as a baseline for this discussion, we can start by looking at what has happened to the structure of the banking industry since the financial crisis. While community banks face considerable challenges, in general they have emerged from the last decade as strong competitors: On average, they have grown somewhat larger and have expanded their geographic footprints. In other words, we have a more resilient, stronger community banking sector, but one with fewer locally headquartered banks. With that in mind, let's look at what leads me to these conclusions. As seen infigure 1, it is true that there are now many fewer small community banks—those with less than $250 million in assets—than there were in 2011.2At the same time, the numbers of both large community banks and banks over $10 billion in assets (non-community banks) haven't changed much. What do we find when we dig a little deeper? As shown infigure 2, very few small community banks failed or were liquidated in the past eight years—just over 100 banks, or 2 percent, of the total number in this size category as of 2011. About 2,800 banks, well over half of this original group, had no change in ownership and stayed below $250 million in assets. About 470 banks, or 10 percent of the initial number, had grown and are now above $250 million in assets. And over this time, just over one-fourth of the smallest community banks, nearly 1,200 of them, were acquired by other banks. That is certainly a large number of acquisitions. But, again, let's look a little deeper. A fair share of those acquired banks—one in five—were acquired by another bank within the same holding company (figure 3). You could consider that more of a reorganization at the holding company level rather than an acquisition by a competitor. The remaining banks—20 percent of the smallest banks operating in 2011—were acquired by another financial institution. Seventeen of the acquisitions, about one and a half percent, were acquisitions of a small community bank by a credit union, while 14, just over one percent, involved a non-community bank acquirer with over $10 billion in assets. In other words, approximately four out of five of the small banks that were acquired during this period, or about 930 banks, were acquired by another community bank.3 To better understand what is happening with these institutions, we looked at several potential differences between small community banks that have been acquired and those that were not. Was it the smallest community banks, or those with the smallest markets, that were most likely to be acquired? It turns out that the key difference between these banks was not their geographic reach or their size, but rather their profitability. We find that small banks that were acquired by another institution were, on average, about the same size and geographic scope as other small banks but they were less profitable. This fact challenges the notion held by some that small scale or operating in a very limited geographic area is a disadvantage and it shows that many small, locally focused banks are performing well in a changing and challenging marketplace. Bank regulators should understand how the evolving structure of community banking has affected customers and how regulations can be tailored to limit the extent to which consolidation is driven by unnecessary, ineffective, or excessive regulatory burden. Unfortunately, current research does not provide enough evidence to conclusively answer these questions. Earlier research has shown that technological change and the removal of regulatory restrictions on interstate banking in the 1980s and 1990s have played important roles in driving consolidation.4 We can gain more insight into the factors that underlie changes in community banking by asking community bankers. My former colleagues at the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) have done that in their community bank survey and the companion "Five Questions for Five Bankers" interviews.5 Results of the 2019 survey will be revealed during the next session, but I don't think I am giving too much away to share that the factors mentioned as driving consolidation this year remain consistent with previous results. The 2018 survey shows that among banks indicating that they had received and seriously considered accepting an acquisition offer from another institution during the previous 12 months, a large majority say the cost of regulations or the lack of economies of scale at their current size are "important" or "very important" in their decision to consider the offer. About half mention succession issues. The survey did not ask which factor bankers consider most important, and there are many possible reasons a bank would consider selling. But it should not be surprising that the cost of regulation is cited as a leading factor by nearly 75 percent of these respondents. What about those who made an offer to buy another bank during the past year? A majority, 8 out of 10, cite economies of scale as a factor in making an acquisition offer. Other common motivations include the desire to enter a new market, the ability to exploit underutilized potential at the target institution and the desire to expand within an existing market. I find these results very encouraging, reflecting an industry that believes in the future of community banking and is taking steps to invest in that future. While it was not addressed in this part of the survey, it seems to me that the cost of regulation could have been a factor in making acquisition offers, possibly based on the theory that there could be efficiency gains by spreading fixed regulatory costs over a larger firm. It is possible these savings may have been a factor for the roughly 80 percent who cited "economies of scale." More detailed questions in future surveys could provide firmer evidence about the effect of regulatory costs on decisions related to consolidation. The "Five Questions for Five Bankers" initiative provides many additional insights into the forces driving change in community banking. I find this initiative particularly valuable, because it is conducted by state banking commissioners who I know from my experience have deep insights into conditions in their states. Last year, 28 commissioners conducted structured interviews with a small number of community bankers in their states. The results show that bank consolidation is widely viewed as a trend that will continue into the future. Many bankers see that as a concern, but others see consolidation as an opportunity. Bankers from many states cited regulatory burden or compliance costs as major factors driving consolidation. Other frequently mentioned motives for consolidation were the costs of keeping up with technological change and the need to scale up in order to compete in a technology-focused landscape and with non-bank fintech firms in some service areas. Succession planning and finding employees were other common concerns, and bankers in a few states mentioned population decline in some rural areas as a significant issue driving the consolidation trend. The Five Questions interviews provide a wealth of anecdotes about industry trends, and I would encourage researchers to consider utilizing the detailed interview approach in exploring the causes and effects of community bank consolidation. It is important to point out that many of the changes to community banking through consolidation that I have described, in a general sense, are a natural and often desirable consequence of competition in a vibrant market economy. However, consolidation is less desirable when it limits access and choice for customers without other benefits, or when it is an unintended effect of government regulation and the cost of that regulation rather than a result of vigorous competition. This isn't news to community bankers or to community banking researchers. It is not news to many people who live in small towns or urban areas who have lost access to community banks with deep roots in the community. And it is a major challenge for those who live in areas that lack access to service from any bank. Acquiring banks need to consider that when you purchase a community bank and enter into a new market, along with the new customers and opportunities come a responsibility to be a part of and to support that community. That is why I believe it is critical that we work together to find ways to preserve the benefits provided to communities by well-managed, strong financial institutions that are deeply grounded in the areas they serve—including the communities that they expand or merge into. Now let's consider how the changes I have described in the banking industry have affected the benefits provided to local communities across the United States. One might expect that the decline in the number of banks over the past few decades would mean communities would see fewer banks operating within the average local banking market. In fact, when viewing the data in a national perspective, the number of banks per local market has been quite stable over time in both urban and rural areas. There may be two factors that explain this outcome. First, many bank mergers combine firms that do not operate in the same local area, so they don't reduce the number of competitors in any market. Second, many banks continue to expand their geographic scope by opening branches in new markets, leading to an increase in the number of banks in those local areas that offsets the decline from bank mergers in the same market. Of course, stability in the average number of banks across a large number of markets does not imply stability locally within each market. Many local markets have seen declines in the number of banks, while others have experienced increases. And even if the number of banks in a community does not change, there is a difference for customers and communities between a branch of a bank with numerous locations and the headquarters of a bank that is strongly rooted in a community. For example, does bank consolidation influence the availability of credit to local small businesses? A number of studies have addressed this question and have yielded mixed results. The effect of a merger on small business lending depends on a number of factors, including the size of the merging banks, whether the acquirer is focused on small business lending, and the response of other local banks to the merger.6Studies have also shown that the post-merger bank tends to be healthier than the target institution was before the merger, which could to lead to an increase in the availability of credit in the community.7The bottom line is that some studies find small business lending goes up after mergers, and others find it goes down. Given the wide range of results, this is another topic where policymakers and the public would benefit from further research and analysis. One very clear trend in the United States is a decline in the number of bank headquarters. Acquisitions have resulted in the conversion of many bank headquarters into new branches of the acquiring institution. Unfortunately, some evidence suggests that these conversions may adversely affect the local communities that are no longer home to a headquarters. The impacts extend well beyond the availability of credit. Bank executives and staff who serve on the local chamber of commerce or on the boards of local hospitals or nonprofits may move to the new headquarters location, creating a leadership void in their old hometown. Unfortunately, community involvement like this is difficult to measure. We turned to Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) performance evaluations in the hope that they would offer some insights into local involvement by banks. Because certain institutions are subject to community development tests, their performance evaluations include information on the bank's qualifying loans, investments (including donations) and services, grants, and certain community service activities.8 Comparing performance evaluations from CRA exam reports before and after an acquisition can provide some limited, case-specific evidence on the potential consequences of the loss of a bank headquarters. Several examples from the past decade show that local donations and community service activity decline in communities that lost a bank headquarters following a merger. Pre-merger CRA evaluations detailed donations to organizations targeting initiatives such as child care, job training, homeless shelters, and scholarship programs for low- and moderate-income (LMI) individuals. Other notable activities included in-kind donations of real estate to Habitat for Humanity and monetary contributions to food pantries, Meals on Wheels, and Big Brothers Big Sisters of America. Bank officers and employees also donated significant time to community service including through financial education to LMI individuals, mentoring programs, and service on the boards of local housing development agencies. Many of these benefits were lost after a merger. The wealth of information that supervisors include in the CRA reports offers a unique look into the type of involvement that communities potentially stand to lose when headquarters move or are eliminated. More research into the effects of losing a bank headquarters could help determine whether these examples are isolated or a predictable result of consolidation. In closing, let me return to the question of what we know and what we would like to know. We know that consolidation accelerated after the Congress removed barriers to interstate banking, and that it has proceeded more or less steadily since that time. We do not know if and to what extent other factors—such as achieving a desired level of economies of scale, for example—have been driving consolidation. We have recently seen a rising number of acquisitions by credit unions, and we do not fully understand the implications of this trend, which seems likely to continue to accelerate. We know that profitability is a more important factor in predicting acquisitions than bank size or geographic area, but more research on why some smaller banks are more profitable than others could be valuable. We know from the CSBS surveys that regulatory costs are motivating banks that are considering selling or merging, and we could learn more about what is motivating buyers. Deeper and more creative research is certainly needed to understand how acquisitions affect many communities, small businesses, and consumers. One factor is the vital leadership and supporting role many small banks play in their communities. While that benefit may be hard to measure, I think it is essential that researchers try to do so. Communities need leaders and institutions that are deeply rooted in their cities, towns, and rural areas. Strong relationships and extensive experience are not easily replaced. Finally, it is important that we understand why so few new banks have been created. Are asset thresholds too high? Are regulations too burdensome? Or have low interest rates meant that net interest rate margins are just too narrow? Understanding the lack of new bank formation is as important as understanding the extent of consolidation and competition. I am sure you have noticed that I have given you more questions than answers today. That was one of my goals, because I am confident that as researchers you have the skills and creativity to focus on the best questions and find the most insightful answers. And when you do uncover new insights, my colleagues and I will always be eager to learn from and act on what you have found. ReferencesAvery, Robert B., and Katherine A. Samolyk (2004). "Bank Consolidation and Small Business Lending: The Role of Community Banks,"Journal of Financial Services Research,vol. 25 (April), pp. 291–325. Berger, Allen N., Rebecca S. Demsetz, and Philip E. Strahan (1999). "The Consolidation of the Financial Services Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future,"Journal of Banking and Finance,vol. 23 (February), pp. 135–94. Berger, Allen N., Anthony Saunders, Joseph M. Scalise, and Gregory F. Udell (1998). "The Effects of Bank Mergers and Acquisitions on Small Business Lending,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 50 (November), pp. 187–229. Focarelli, Dario, Fabio Panetta, and Carmelo Salleo (2002). "Why Do Banks Merge?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 34 (November), pp. 1047–66. Jagtiani, Julapa, Ian Kotliar, and Raman Quinn Maingi (2016). "Community Bank Mergers and Their Impact on Small Business Lending,"Journal of Financial Stability,vol. 27 (October), pp. 106–21. Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren (1998). "Bank Consolidation and Small Business Lending: It's Not Just Bank Size That Matters,"Journal of Banking and Finance,vol. 22 (August), pp. 799–819. 1. I would like to thank Robin Prager, John Kandrac, and Mark Wicks for their research and assistance in preparing this speech.Return to text 2. Assets are in constant 2018 dollars.Return to text 3. The pattern during the pre-crisis period is similar. The difference from the post-crisis period is that from the fourth quarter of 1998 to the third quarter of 2007, a larger share of the acquisitions involved an internal reorganization within a bank holding company. This period begins four years after the signing of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, which removed many restrictions on interstate banking.Return to text 4. See Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan (1999) and Focarelli, Panetta, and Salleo (2002).Return to text 5. A video on the results of the CSBS 2018 Survey of Community Banks is available on this conference's website athttps://www.communitybanking.org/news; for more information on the survey, see the CSBS website athttps://www.csbs.org.Return to text 6. For example, see Berger and others (1998), Peek and Rosengren (1998), and Avery and Samolyk (2004).Return to text 7. See Jagtiani, Kotliar, and Maingi (2016).Return to text 8. Under CRA, a small institution has assets of less than $321 million as of December 31 in both of the two prior calendar years. An intermediate small institution has at least $321 million in assets and less than $1.284 billion in assets under the same calendar rules. A large institution has greater than $1.284 billion in assets as of December 31 in both prior calendar years. Activities that qualify for community development tests must primarily focus on economic development, revitalization of low- and moderate-income (LMI) locales, affordable housing, and services that target to LMI individuals. Large and intermediate small banks are subject to review of their community development activities while some small banks voluntarily choose to have their community development activities reviewed.Return to text Accessible Version
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (Bureau) and Federal Reserve Board today announced the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) that will apply for determining exempt consumer credit and lease transactions in 2020. These thresholds are set pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act that require adjusting these thresholds annually based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the Federal Reserve Board and the Bureau will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. Based on the annual percentage increase in the CPI-W as of June 1, 2019, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $58,300 or less in 2020. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the Bureau, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these notices jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML: Regulation M Federal RegisternoticeHTML: Regulation Z
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Reserve Board, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that the threshold for exempting loans from special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans during 2020 will increase from $26,700 to $27,200. The threshold amount will be effective January 1, 2020, and is based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) as of June 1, 2019. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 amended the Truth in Lending Act to add special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, including a requirement that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the home's interior before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less and also provide that the exemption threshold will be adjusted annually to reflect increases in the CPI-W. If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. The attached notice will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Monday announced that they had finalized a rule that modifies their resolution plan requirements for large firms. The rule retains resolution plan elements in place for the largest firms, while reducing requirements for smaller firms that pose less risk to the financial system. Resolution plans, also known as living wills, describe a firm's strategy for orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the firm. Since the resolution planning requirements took effect in 2012, the largest firms have improved their resolution strategies and governance, refined their estimates of liquidity and capital needs in resolution, and simplified their legal structures. These changes have made the firms substantially more resilient. The final rule is substantially the same as the proposal from earlier this year. It uses a separate framework developed by the banking agencies for application of prudential requirements, and establishes resolution planning requirements tailored to the level of risk a firm poses to the financial system. The final rule is consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act and would affect domestic and foreign firms with more than $100 billion in total consolidated assets. For the most systemically important firms, the final rule would adopt the current practice of requiring resolution plans to be submitted on a two-year cycle. The final rule would tailor the rule's requirements for firms that do not pose the same systemic risk as the largest institutions, requiring resolution plans to be submitted on a three-year cycle. Both groups of firms would alternate between submitting full resolution plans and targeted resolution plans. Foreign firms with relatively limited U.S. operations would be required to submit reduced resolution plans. A targeted resolution plan would include core elements related to capital, liquidity, and plans for recapitalization, as well as material changes to the firm and areas of interest identified by the agencies. Targeted resolution plans would not include certain areas if they are materially unchanged from one cycle to another, such as descriptions of management information systems and corporate governance systems. As a result, targeted resolution plans would give the agencies meaningful insight into the key vulnerabilities in a firm's resolution strategy. Firms with less than $250 billion in total consolidated assets that do not meet certain risk criteria would no longer be subject to the rule. These firms have simpler structures, engage more exclusively in traditional banking activity, and present less risk. These changes do not affect the resolution planning requirements under the FDIC's insured depository institution rule for large insured depository institutions, which is part of a separate rulemaking. In a change from the proposal, only smaller and less complex firms could request changes to their full resolution plans and both agencies would need to approve those requests for them to become effective. The attached charts show the new requirements and a list of firms that are expected to be in each category. The rule will be effective 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Board Memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice Visual (PDF) Opening Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard
Five federal financial regulatory agencies on Tuesday announced that they finalized revisions to simplify compliance requirements relating to the "Volcker rule." By statute, the Volcker rule generally prohibits banking entities from engaging in proprietary trading or investing in or sponsoring hedge funds or private equity funds. Under the revised rule, firms that do not have significant trading activities will have simplified and streamlined compliance requirements, while firms with significant trading activity will have more stringent compliance requirements. Community banks generally are exempt from the Volcker rule by statute. The revisions continue to prohibit proprietary trading, while providing greater clarity and certainty for activities allowed under the law. With the changes, the agencies expect that the universe of trades that are considered prohibited proprietary trading will remain generally the same as under the agencies' 2013 rule. The changes were jointly developed by the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. The rules will be effective on January 1, 2020, with a compliance date of January 1, 2021.
The federal bank regulatory agencies today finalized updates to rules restricting the ability of a director or other management official to serve at more than one depository institution or depository holding company. The updates provide relief for community banks that have $10 billion or less in total assets and are unchanged from theproposal announced in December 2018. Previously, the management interlock rules prohibited a management official working at a depository institution or holding company with more than $2.5 billion in total assets from simultaneously working at an unaffiliated depository organization with more than $1.5 billion in total assets. The previous thresholds were established by Congress in 1996. To account for changes in the market, the final rule increases both thresholds to $10 billion in total assets, as the agencies proposed previously. Management officials will generally remain prohibited from serving with multiple depository organizations that are above the new thresholds, limiting the potential risk of anticompetitive conduct at larger institutions. The final rule responds to comments received during the recent review required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. It was jointly issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and will take effect upon publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Five federal agencies today announced a proposal to change the swap margin rules to facilitate the implementation of prudent risk management strategies at certain banks and swap entities. The swap margin rule would no longer require swap entities to hold initial margin for uncleared swaps with affiliates. However, inter-affiliate transactions would still be subject to variation margin requirements. Swap entities regulated by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Reserve Board also would be subject to requirements under sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act. The Federal Reserve Board continues to work on proposed amendments to Regulation W that would, among other things, clarify the treatment of bank-affiliate derivatives under sections 23A and 23B. Inter-affiliate swaps typically are used for internal risk management purposes, by transferring risk to a centralized risk management function within the firm. The proposal would give firms additional flexibility to allocate collateral internally, supporting prudent risk management strategies that support safety and soundness. The proposal would not change the capital standards for swap entities supervised by the five agencies. Furthermore, to aid in the transition away from LIBOR, the agencies proposed to allow certain technical amendments to legacy swaps without altering their status under the swap margin rules. For smaller counterparties, the proposal would provide clarification on documentation requirements and implementation relief. In addition, the proposal would extend the effective date by one year to September 1, 2021, for smaller counterparties to meet initial margin requirements. Comments on the proposal will be accepted for 30 days following publication in the Federal Register. Statement by Governor Lael Brainard
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the premiere of "Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve," Salt Lake City, Utah Thank you, Randy, for the kind introduction. It is a great pleasure to join you all this morning for the premiere of KUED's documentaryMarriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve.It is also a great pleasure to be in Utah. It has been a long time since a Fed Chair made an official visit to Utah. Alan Greenspan spoke in Salt Lake City 22 years ago. All of the Utahns here know about the Eccles family's enormous contributions to building the economies of the state and the region. The documentary will remind us of Marriner's immense contribution not just to the region, but also to our nation during the Great Depression, World War II, and thereafter. Many Eccles family members are present here today. I would like to especially recognize Marriner's grandson, Chip Eccles; Marriner's nephew, Spencer Eccles; and Spencer's daughter, Hope Eccles. Randy was fortunate to marry Hope, and he has a second Federal Reserve connection. He is our Vice Chair for Supervision. In a way, I feel that I know Marriner, too. I work in a building named after him. I sit in the office where he sat as Chair. And his portrait hangs in a room where I frequently meet with guests, Board colleagues, and staff. When I sit in my usual seat, he stands, looking over my left shoulder, an enigmatic expression—neither approving nor disapproving—on his face. Talk about pressure! More seriously, his legacy endures in much more than a name on a building and a portrait on a wall. As the Depression deepened, he presciently recognized that the federal government should act forcefully to put people back to work and stimulate business. In a speech delivered here in Utah in 1932, Marriner asked what was the purpose of an economic system if not to allow those willing and able to work the opportunity to do so, to "guarantee to them sustenance for their families and protection against want and destitution."1His ideas helped form the basis of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and anticipated the not-yet-published tenets of British economist John Maynard Keynes. After World War II, he recognized, again presciently, that high inflation, not contraction, posed the principal threat to the U.S. economy. And, perhaps most importantly from my perspective as Fed Chair, he is responsible more than any other person for the fact that the United States today has an independent central bank—a central bank able to make decisions in the long-term best interest of the economy, without regard to the political pressures of the moment. During his years on the Fed Board, Marriner played a crucial role in two landmark accomplishments that established the modern Federal Reserve—the Banking Act of 1935, near the start of his tenure at the Fed, and the Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of 1951, at the end. FDR nominated Marriner to lead the Fed Board in 1934. He accepted on the condition that Roosevelt support a restructuring of the Fed, which had failed to counter the contraction gripping the nation's economy. The result was the Banking Act of 1935, which significantly strengthened the structural independence of the Federal Reserve. And, symbolically important, it authorized the Board to move its meetings from the Treasury Department to a new building—the building that now bears Marriner's name—on Constitution Avenue, across from the Lincoln Memorial. During World War II, the Fed effectively ceded control of monetary policy to the Treasury Department by agreeing to maintain a low interest rate peg on government bonds. The low rates helped the government finance the war, but after the war ended, inflation soared. It subsided for a time but, with the Korean War, spiked again. In 1951, Marriner led other Board members in precipitating a clean break with the peg arrangement, laying the foundation for the modern Fed. The Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of that year separated government debt management from monetary policy and freed the Fed to combat high inflation and set short-term interest rates based on what was best for the economy. Those are just the highlights of Marriner's Fed career. You will learn much more in the film we are about to see. In closing, I leave you with this statement from Marriner, inscribed on a plaque in the Eccles Building: "The management of the central bank must be absolutely free from the dangers of control by politics and by private interests, singly or combined." 1. See Marriner S. Eccles (1932), "Depression: Its Causes, Effects and Suggested Remedies," speech delivered at the Utah State Bankers Convention, June 17, Marriner S. Eccles Papers, FRASER, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 6–7.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Gender and Career Progression" European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Congratulations on what I have no doubt was a productive and thought-provoking day, though one, I am sure, that also underscored the many remaining challenges for women and minorities in the professions of economics and finance. I want to thank our hosts, the European Central Bank, who put so much work into making this conference a success, as well as the conference organizers from all three sponsoring institutions—the ECB, Federal Reserve, and the Bank of England. I also want to express my appreciation to the many researchers from universities and from other central banks, as well as the members of women's and minority committees of economics and finance associations from around the world, who are attending the conference in Frankfurt. I wish that I could have been there with you to participate in the discussions. I found the conference program to be particularly interesting, and I look forward to Federal Reserve staff coming back to Washington to share what they learned from the research and discussions. At the Federal Reserve, we greatly value this conference, not only for the interactions that our staff have while they are there, but also when they bring back what they learn and share it with our staff. Last year, we had over 200 staff members from across the organization attend summary presentations in DC given by several staff members who had attended the conference in London. In fact, staff in Washington had a "watch party" to view the webcast of today's panels. The topics of today's conference, including papers on the promotion of women, the role of culture and institutions, and the dynamics of publishing, conferences, and seminars, will all spur additional conversations and ideas for action among staff at the Federal Reserve. In my view, central banks have a responsibility to be leaders in addressing diversity and inclusion, not only for our own institutions, but also because of our influence on the profession as a whole. Part of the value of this conference is that we, as central banks, can promote the study of these issues and discuss concrete steps that we can take together to address them. Certainly, we take diversity and inclusion issues to heart at the Federal Reserve.1We believe that the best ideas, policies and, ultimately, service to the public are the result of diverse perspectives, and from a staff that reflects the rich diversity of our nation. Inclusion makes us stronger by providing all employees the assurance that they will be working in an environment that welcomes and values their differences, and that recognizes and rewards people according to the contributions they make in advancing the mission of the organization. That is not to say that we have all of the solutions, or that we do not have considerable progress to make. But we have made efforts in a number of areas. These efforts are consistent with the Congressional directive to establish the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion, and as articulated in the Board of Governors' Strategic Plan for Diversity and Inclusion.2 First, we have made a commitment, and have made progress, to make our institution more diverse. That includes efforts to bring greater diversity to the Board of Directors of our Federal Reserve Banks and Branches as well as to senior leadership in the Federal Reserve System. We have also worked to improve our internal culture. These efforts include re-establishing and strengthening employee resource groups. We are working to come up with codes of conduct including efforts to make our meetings more inclusive and set rules around behavior in seminars. We are also providing diversity and inclusion as well as bystander training to both new and existing employees. Second, we have broadened our reach in recruiting to provide a more diverse range of applicants the opportunity to apply for positions at the Federal Reserve—through strengthening our connections to schools that serve diverse populations, hiring an outreach specialist for these communities, establishing a stronger presence at career fairs for diverse students, and hosting career events for students to promote jobs in economics and finance at the Federal Reserve. Third, we are working with high schools and universities to inspire students' interest in economics and finance. We are also working to provide them with the tools they need to enter these fields. This has included partnerships with local high schools to teach economics, and with a local Historically Black University, Howard University, to teach and mentor students in economics and statistical analysis. This last initiative has led to students developing an interest and pursuing careers in economics, including as research assistants at the Federal Reserve, and several are currently employed at the Board as research assistants. Of course, these conferences are also an important part of addressing diversity and inclusion in central banking, and the economics and finance professions. I look forward to welcoming all of you to Washington next fall to attend the third such conference, hosted by the Federal Reserve. We hope these conferences will inspire further work on these important topics and will highlight the issues that researchers are addressing, and more broadly promote the conversations we are having in the economic and finance professions. Thank you for your work, and I look forward to seeing you at the Federal Reserve next year. 1. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/diversityinclusion.htmReturn to text 2.https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/minority-women-inclusion.htmReturn to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'Old' and 'New' Economies" 61st Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Denver, Colorado Thank you for this opportunity to speak at the 61st annual meeting of the National Association for Business Economics. At the Fed, we like to say that monetary policy is data dependent. We say this to emphasize that policy is never on a preset course and will change as appropriate in response to incoming information. But that does not capture the breadth and depth of what data-dependent decisionmaking means to us. From its beginnings more than a century ago, the Federal Reserve has gone to great lengths to collect and rigorously analyze the best information to make sound decisions for the public we serve. The topic of this meeting, "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'New' and 'Old' Economies," captures the essence of a major challenge for data-dependent policymaking. We must sort out in real time, as best we can, what the profound changes underway in the economy mean for issues such as the functioning of labor markets, the pace of productivity growth, and the forces driving inflation. Of course, issues like these have always been with us. Indeed, 100 years ago, some of the first Fed policymakers recognized the need for more timely information on the rapidly evolving state of industry and decided to create and publish production indexes for the United States. Today I will pay tribute to the 100 years of dedicated—and often behind the scenes—work of those tracking change in the industrial landscape. I will then turn to three challenges our dynamic economy is posing for policy at present: First, what would the consequences of a sharp rise in the price of oil be for the U.S. economy? This question, which never seems far from relevance, is again drawing our attention after recent events in the Persian Gulf. While the question is familiar, technological advances in the energy sector are rapidly changing our assessment of the answer. Second, with terabytes of data increasingly competing with truckloads of goods in economic importance, what are the best ways to measure output and productivity? Put more provocatively, might the recent productivity slowdown be an artifact of antiquated measurement? Third, how tight is the labor market? Given our mandate of maximum employment and price stability, this question is at the very core of our work. But answering it in real time in a dynamic economy as jobs are gained in one area but lost in others is remarkably challenging. In August, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) announced that job gains over the year through March were likely a half-million lower than previously reported. I will discuss how we are using big data to improve our grasp of the job market in the face of such revisions. These three quite varied questions highlight the broad range of issues that currently come under the simple heading "data dependent." After exploring them, I will comment briefly on recent developments in money markets and on monetary policy. A Century of Industrial ProductionOur story of data dependence in the face of change begins when the Fed opened for business in 1914. World War I was breaking out in Europe, and over the next four years the war would fuel profound growth and transformation in the U.S. economy.1But you could not have seen this change in the gross national product data; the Department of Commerce did not publish those until 1942. The Census Bureau had been running a census of manufactures since 1905, but that came only every five years—an eternity in the rapidly changing economy. In need of more timely information, the Fed began creating and publishing a series of industrial output reports that soon evolved into industrial production indexes.2The indexes initially comprised 22 basic commodities, chosen in part because they covered the major industrial groups, but also for the practical reason that data were available with less than a one-month lag. The Fed's efforts were among the earliest in creating timely measures of aggregate production. Over the century of its existence, our industrial production team has remained at the frontier of economic measurement, using the most advanced techniques to monitor U.S. industry and nimbly track changes in production. What Are the Consequences of an Oil Price Spike?Let's turn now to the first question of the consequences of an oil price spike.Figure 1shows U.S. oil production since 1920. After rising fairly steadily through the early 1970s, production began a long period of gradual decline. By 2005, production was at about the same level as it had been 50 years earlier. Since then, remarkable advances in the technology for finding and extracting oil have led to a rapid increase in production to levels higher than ever before.3In 2018, the United States became the world's largest oil producer.4Oil exports have surged, imports have fallen (figure 2), and the U.S. Energy Information Administration projects that this month, for the first time in many decades, the United States will be a net exporter of oil.5 As monetary policymakers, we closely monitor developments in oil markets because disruptions in these markets have played a role in several U.S. recessions and in the Great Inflation of the 1960s and 1970s. Traditionally, we assessed that a sharp rise in the price of oil would have a strong negative effect on consumers and businesses and, hence, on the U.S. economy. Today a higher oil price would still cause dislocations and hardship for many, but with exports and imports nearly balanced, the higher price paid by consumers is roughly offset by higher earnings of workers and firms in the U.S. oil industry. Moreover, because it is now easier to ramp up oil production, a sustained price rise can quickly boost output, providing a shock absorber in the face of supply disruptions. Thus, setting aside the effects of geopolitical uncertainty that may accompany higher oil prices, we now judge that a price spike would likely have nearly offsetting effects on U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). How Should We Measure Output and Productivity?Let's now turn to the second question of how to best measure output and productivity. While there are some subtleties in measuring oil output, we know how to count barrels of oil. Measuring the overall level of goods and services produced in the economy is fundamentally messier, because it requires adding apples and oranges—and automobiles and myriad other goods and services. The hard-working statisticians creating the official statistics regularly adapt the data sources and methods so that, insofar as possible, the measured data provide accurate indicators of the state of the economy. Periods of rapid change present particular challenges, and it can take time for the measurement system to adapt to fully and accurately reflect the changes in the economy. The advance of technology has long presented measurement challenges. In 1987, Nobel Prize–winning economist Robert Solow quipped that "you can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics."6In the second half of the 1990s, this measurement puzzle was at the heart of monetary policymaking.7Chairman Alan Greenspan famously argued that the United States was experiencing the dawn of a new economy, and that potential and actual output were likely understated in official statistics. Where others saw capacity constraints and incipient inflation, Greenspan saw a productivity boom that would leave room for very low unemployment without inflation pressures. In light of the uncertainty it faced, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that the appropriate risk‑management approach called for refraining from interest rate increases unless and until there were clearer signs of rising inflation. Under this policy, unemployment fell near record lows without rising inflation, and later revisions to GDP measurement showed appreciably faster productivity growth.8 This episode illustrates a key challenge to making data-dependent policy in real time: Good decisions require good data, but the data in hand are seldom as good as we would like. Sound decisionmaking therefore requires the application of good judgment and a healthy dose of risk management. Productivity is again presenting a puzzle. Official statistics currently show productivity growth slowing significantly in recent years, with the growth in output per hour worked falling from more than 3 percent a year from 1995 to 2003 to less than half that pace since then.9Analysts are actively debating three alternative explanations for this apparent slowdown: First, the slowdown may be real and may persist indefinitely as productivity growth returns to more‑normal levels after a brief golden age.10Second, the slowdown may instead be a pause of the sort that often accompanies fundamental technological change, so that productivity gains from recent technology advances will appear over time as society adjusts.11Third, the slowdown may be overstated, perhaps greatly, because of measurement issues akin to those at work in the 1990s.12At this point, we cannot know which of these views may gain widespread acceptance, and monetary policy will play no significant role in how this puzzle is resolved. As in the late 1990s, however, we are carefully assessing the implications of possibly mismeasured productivity gains. Moreover, productivity growth seems to have moved up over the past year after a long period at very low levels; we do not know whether that welcome trend will be sustained. Recent research suggests that current official statistics may understate productivity growth by missing a significant part of the growing value we derive from fast internet connections and smartphones. These technologies, which were just emerging 15 years ago, are now ubiquitous (figure 3). We can now be constantly connected to the accumulated knowledge of humankind and receive near instantaneous updates on the lives of friends far and wide. And, adding to the measurement challenge, many of these services are free, which is to say, not explicitly priced. How should we value the luxury of never needing to ask for directions? Or the peace and tranquility afforded by speedy resolution of those contentious arguments over the trivia of the moment? Researchers have tried to answer these questions in various ways.13For example, Fed researchers have recently proposed a novel approach to measuring the value of services consumers derive from cellphones and other devices based on the volume of data flowing over those connections.14Taking their accounting at face value, GDP growth would have been about 1/2 percentage point higher since 2007, which is an appreciable change and would be very good news. Growth over the previous couple of decades would also have been about 1/4 percentage point higher as well, implying that measurement issues of this sort likely account for only part of the productivity slowdown in current statistics. Research in this area is at an early stage, but this example illustrates the depth of analysis supporting our data-dependent decisionmaking. How Tight Is the Labor Market?Let me now turn from the measurement issues raised by the information age to an issue that has long been at the center of monetary policymaking: How tight is the labor market? Answering this question is central to our outlook for both of our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. While this topic is always front and center in our thinking, I am raising it today to illustrate how we are using big data to inform policymaking. Until recently, the official data showed job gains over the year through March 2019 of about 210,000 a month, which is far higher than necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force and thus hold the unemployment rate constant. In August, the BLS publicly previewed the benchmark data revision coming in February 2020, and the news was that job gains over this period were more like 170,000 per month—a meaningfully lower number that itself remains subject to revision. The pace of job gains is hard to pin down in real time largely because of the dynamism of our economy: Many new businesses open and others close every month, creating some jobs and ending others, and definitive data on this turnover arrive with a substantial lag. Thus, initial data are, in part, sophisticated guesses based on what is known as the birth–death model of firms. Several years ago, we began a collaboration with the payroll processing firm ADP to construct a measure of payroll employment from their data set, which covers about 20 percent of the nation's private workforce and is available to us with a roughly one-week delay.15As described in a recent research paper, we constructed a measure that provides an independent read on payroll employment that complements the official statistics.16While experience is still limited with the new measure, we find promising evidence that it can refine our real-time picture of job gains. For example, in the first eight months of 2008, as the Great Recession was getting underway, the official monthly employment data showed total job losses of about 750,000 (figure 4). A later benchmark revision told a much bleaker story, with declines of about 1.5 million. Our new measure, had it been available in 2008, would have been much closer to the revised data, alerting us that the job situation might be considerably worse than the official data suggested.17 We believe that the new measure may help us better understand job market conditions in real time. The preview of the BLS benchmark revision leaves average job gains over the year through March solidly above the pace required to accommodate growth in the workforce over that time, but where we had seen a booming job market, we now see more-moderate growth. The benchmark revision will not directly affect data for job gains since March, but experience with past revisions suggests that some part of the benchmark will likely carry forward. Thus, the currently reported job gains of 157,000 per month on average over the past three months may well be revised somewhat lower. Based on a range of data and analysis, including our new measure, we now judge that, even allowing for such a revision, job gains remain above the level required to provide jobs for new entrants to the jobs market over time. Of course, the pace of job gains is only one of many job market issues that figure into our assessment of how the economy is performing relative to our maximum-employment mandate and our assessment of any inflationary pressures arising in the job market. What Does Data Dependence Mean at Present?In summary, data dependence is, and always has been, at the heart of policymaking at the Federal Reserve. We are always seeking out new and better sources of information and refining our analysis of that information to keep us abreast of conditions as our economy constantly reinvents itself. Before wrapping up, I will discuss recent developments in money markets and the current stance of monetary policy. Our influence on the financial conditions that affect employment and inflation is indirect. The Federal Reserve sets two overnight interest rates: the interest rate paid on banks' reserve balances and the rate on our reverse repurchase agreements. We use these two administered rates to keep a market-determined rate, the federal funds rate, within a target range set by the FOMC. We rely on financial markets to transmit these rates through a variety of channels to the rates paid by households and businesses—and to financial conditions more broadly. In mid-September, an important channel in the transmission process—wholesale funding markets—exhibited unexpectedly intense volatility. Payments to meet corporate tax obligations and to purchase Treasury securities triggered notable liquidity pressures in money markets. Overnight interest rates spiked, and the effective federal funds rate briefly moved above the FOMC's target range. To counter these pressures, we began conducting temporary open market operations. These operations have kept the federal funds rate in the target range and alleviated money market strains more generally. While a range of factors may have contributed to these developments, it is clear that without a sufficient quantity of reserves in the banking system, even routine increases in funding pressures can lead to outsized movements in money market interest rates. This volatility can impede the effective implementation of monetary policy, and we are addressing it. Indeed, my colleagues and I will soon announce measures to add to the supply of reserves over time. Consistent with a decision we made in January, our goal is to provide an ample supply of reserves to ensure that control of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily by setting our administered rates and not through frequent market interventions. Of course, we will not hesitate to conduct temporary operations if needed to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates within the target range. Reserve balances are one among several items on the liability side of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, and demand for these liabilities—notably, currency in circulation—grows over time. Hence, increasing the supply of reserves or even maintaining a given level over time requires us to increase the size of our balance sheet. As we indicated in our March statement on balance sheet normalization, at some point, we will begin increasing our securities holdings to maintain an appropriate level of reserves.18That time is now upon us. I want to emphasize that growth of our balance sheet for reserve management purposes should in no way be confused with the large-scale asset purchase programs that we deployed after the financial crisis. Neither the recent technical issues nor the purchases of Treasury bills we are contemplating to resolve them should materially affect the stance of monetary policy, to which I now turn. Our goal in monetary policy is to promote maximum employment and stable prices, which we interpret as inflation running closely around our symmetric 2 percent objective. At present, the jobs and inflation pictures are favorable. Many indicators show a historically strong labor market, with solid job gains, the unemployment rate at half-century lows, and rising prime-age labor force participation. Wages are rising, especially for those with lower-paying jobs. Inflation is somewhat below our symmetric 2 percent objective but has been gradually firming over the past few months. FOMC participants continue to see a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective as most likely. Many outside forecasters agree. But there are risks to this favorable outlook, principally from global developments. Growth around much of the world has weakened over the past year and a half, and uncertainties around trade, Brexit, and other issues pose risks to the outlook. As those factors have evolved, my colleagues and I have shifted our views about appropriate monetary policy toward a lower path for the federal funds rate and have lowered its target range by 50 basis points. We believe that our policy actions are providing support for the outlook. Looking ahead, policy is not on a preset course. The next FOMC meeting is several weeks away, and we will be carefully monitoring incoming information. We will be data dependent, assessing the outlook and risks to the outlook on a meeting-by-meeting basis. Taking all that into account, we will act as appropriate to support continued growth, a strong job market, and inflation moving back to our symmetric 2 percent objective. References Brynjolfsson, Erik, Avinash Collis, and Felix Eggers (2019). "Using Massive Online Choice Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-Being,"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,vol. 116 (April), pp. 7250–55. Brynjolfsson, Erik, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (2018).The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies. NBER Working Paper Series 25148. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010). "Benchmark Article: BLS Establishment Estimates Revised to Incorporate March 2009 Benchmarks (PDF)," February 23. ——— (2019). "Introduction of Quarterly Birth/Death Model Updates in the Establishment Survey," Current Employment Statistics, August 28. Byrne, David M., and Carol Corrado (2019). "Accounting for Innovations in Consumer Digital Services: IT Still Matters (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-049. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Cajner, Tomaz, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz (2019). "Improving the Accuracy of Economic Measurement with Multiple Data Sources: The Case of Payroll Employment Data (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-065. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Decker, Ryan, Aaron Flaaen, and Maria Tito (2016). "Unraveling the Oil Conundrum: Productivity Improvements and Cost Declines in the U.S. Shale Oil Industry," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 22. Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,vol. 29.Chicago: University of Chicago Press,pp. 1–51. ——— (2018). "Is Slow Productivity and Output Growth in Advanced Economies the New Normal?"International Productivity Monitor,no. 35 (Fall), pp. 138–48. Gordon, Robert J. (2017).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hatzius, Jan, Zach Pandl, Alec Phillips, David Mericle, Elad Pashtan, Daan Struyven, Karen Reichgott, and Avisha Thakkar (2016). "Productivity Paradox v2.0 Revisited,"U.S. Economics Analyst,Goldman Sachs Economics Research, September 2. Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2008). "A Retrospective Look at the U.S. Productivity Growth Resurgence,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 22 (Winter), pp. 3–24. Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25. Rockoff, Hugh (2004). "Until It's Over, Over There: The U.S. Economy in World War I," NBER Working Paper Series 10580. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Seskin, Eugene P. (1999). "Improved Estimates of the National Income and Product Accounts for 1959–98: Results of the Comprehensive Revision,"Survey of Current Business,vol. 79 (December), pp. 15–43. Solow, Robert M. (1987). "We'd Better Watch Out,"New York Times Book Review,July 12. U.S. Department of Energy (2018). "U.S. Becomes World's Largest Crude Oil Producer and Department of Energy Authorizes Short Term Natural Gas Exports," press release, September 13. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2016).Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas: Impacts from the Hydraulic Fracturing Water Cycle on Drinking Water Resources in the United States,final report. Washington: EPA, December, available athttp://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/hfstudy/recordisplay.cfm?deid=332990. 1. Hugh Rockoff (2004) analyzes the change that accompanied a 44-month expansion starting in 1914.Return to text 2. For more information on the history of industrial production reporting at the Board, see "Celebrating 100 Years of the Industrial Production Index" athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/100_years_of_ip_data.htm.Return to text 3. Decker, Flaaen, and Tito (2016) explore reasons for the resilience of production, even in light of declines in oil prices.Return to text 4. Department of Energy (2018).Return to text 5. The Energy Information Administration's Short-Term Energy Outlook (STEO; available athttps://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo), released on September 10, 2019, shows that the United States will become a net exporter of crude oil and liquid fuels by October 2019. A new STEO will be published today.Return to text 6. Solow (1987).Return to text 7. I discuss and document this episode more fully in Powell (2018).Return to text 8. Revision and the role of high tech is described in Seskin (1999) and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2008).Return to text 9. Between 1995 and 2003, business-sector output per hour increased at an annual rate of 3.4 percent, and it has risen only 1.4 percent since then. Fernald (2015) suggests 2003 as a break point for the beginning of the productivity slowdown.Return to text 10. See Gordon (2017) and Fernald (2018).Return to text 11. Brynjolfsson, Rock, and Syverson (2018).Return to text 12. Hatzius and others (2016).Return to text 13. In the case of Facebook, Brynjolfsson, Collis, and Eggers (2019) found that the median user required compensation of $48 to live without that social media platform for a month.Return to text 14. Byrne and Corrado (2019).Return to text 15. This share is comparable to that covered in the sample used by the BLS, but the BLS sample is designed to be representative, while the ADP sample is simply their customer base.Return to text 16. Cajner and others (2019).Return to text 17. Any example about the details of data deserves detailed comment. Our ADP-based estimate showed job losses of about 1 million over this period, considerably more than the real-time BLS data but well short of the post-benchmark value. This episode motivated the BLS to revise their procedures in ways that will reduce the revisions in similar episodes in the future. See BLS (2019) for a technical note last updated in August and BLS (2010).Return to text 18. See the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, which are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At The Future of Money in the Digital Age, Sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and Princeton University’s Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, D.C. Technology is driving rapid change in the way we make payments and in the concept of "money."1There is a long history of technological advances challenging the prevailing notions of money, from the trading of coins to the use of paper currency, to the electronic debiting and crediting of funds on the accounts of banks. Today, efforts by global stablecoin networks such as Facebook's Libra to establish the next chapter in the story of money are raising threshold questions about legal and regulatory safeguards, financial stability, and monetary policy. Because of its potential global reach, Facebook's Libra imparts urgency to the debate over what form money can take, who or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled.2 Reassessing MoneyMoney has traditionally served three functions.3Money facilitates payments as a medium of exchange, serves as a store of value that can be relied on for future use, and simplifies transactions by providing a common unit of account to compare the value of goods and services. A decade ago, Bitcoin was heralded as a new kind of digital money that would address frictions in payments as well as serve as a unit of account and store of value without the need for centralized governance. Bitcoin's emergence created an entirely new payment instrument and asset class exchanged over a set of payment rails supported by distributed ledger technology. Distributed ledger technology may allow for a shared, tamper-resistant ledger that can be updated by anyone with sufficient computing power, in contrast to traditional recordkeeping systems built on a single ledger managed by a trusted central entity.4But Bitcoin and some other early iterations of cryptocurrencies have exhibited extreme volatility, limited throughput capacity, unpredictable transaction costs, limited or no governance, and limited transparency, which have limited their utility as a means of payment and unit of account.5 Stablecoins were designed specifically to overcome the substantial volatility exhibited by first-generation cryptocurrencies, which limits their reach in payments and their utility as a unit of account. As the name implies, stablecoins aim to maintain stable value by tying the digital currency to an asset or basket of assets, such as commercial bank deposits or government-issued bonds. Stablecoins also differ from the initial set of cryptocurrencies in that they may be issued by a central entity and rely on third-party institutions for some aspects. Just as any currency's value as a medium of exchange increases with the size of the network using it, so too the power of a stablecoin payment system will depend on its ability to achieve widespread adoption, due to the associated network externalities. In light of the 2.7 billion active monthly users on Facebook's platforms, the Libra stablecoin project stands out for the speed with which its network could reach global scale in a payment system.6 To assess the efforts by stablecoin issuers to provide the three functions of money, it is useful first to consider existing arrangements for the issuance, regulation, and transfer of money. Central bank money and commercial bank money are the foundations of the modern financial system. Central bank money is composed of physical cash and money held in deposits at a central bank. Central bank money is important for payment systems because it represents a safe settlement asset, allowing users to exchange central bank liabilities with confidence in their acceptance and reliability. In addition, central banks can play a critical role as providers of liquidity by lending central bank money at moments of stress. Commercial bank money refers to money held in deposits at commercial banks. It is widely used in part because people are confident that they can convert it on demand to the liability of another commercial bank or the central bank, such as physical cash. This confidence comes in no small part because bank deposits are insured, and commercial banks are subject to supervision, regulation, and deposit insurance requirements.7Consumers and businesses also use this money in transactions because of its convenience and availability, which in turn expand with the size of the network using this money. Nonbank private money or assets can also facilitate transactions among a network of users. In some cases, such as airline miles, such assets may have value only within the network. In other cases, the issuer of an asset within a network may guarantee convertibility to a sovereign currency. Consumers trust that the company issuing such money will be able to honor these liabilities. Many U.S. consumers have experience with nonbank private money in the form of gift cards, loyalty points, and virtual gaming currencies. Although many of these are relatively limited in scale and purpose, some nonbank money networks are sizeable. Starbucks reported that it had $1.6 billion in stored value card liabilities as of September 2018—more than the deposits held at many depository institutions.8 As the scale and scope of such private networks grow, so too do the convenience and benefit of transacting within the network in a self-reinforcing dynamic, called network externalities. These network benefits may be augmented by the active use of network data for a host of purposes, from allocating and pricing credit to sharing reviews to prioritizing information that is pushed to users. In China, consumers and businesses participate in two mobile networks, Alipay and WeChatPay, which by some accounts handled more than $37 trillion in mobile payments last year.9These networks operate within China based on the renminbi as the unit of account, and balances are transferable in and out of bank or credit card accounts. Stablecoins with Global Scale and ScopeStablecoins may resemble private nonbank liabilities depending on their design and claim structure. Stablecoins aspire to achieve the functions of traditional money without relying on confidence in an issuer—such as a central bank—to stand behind the money. Indeed, for some potential stablecoins, a close assessment suggests users may have no rights with respect to the underlying assets or the system overall. We have seen the growth of massive payments networks on existing digital platforms, such as Alibaba and WeChat, and the issuance of stablecoins on a smaller scale, such as Tether, Gemini, and Paxos. What sets Facebook's Libra apart is the combination of an active-user network representing more than a third of the global population with the issuance of a private digital currency opaquely tied to a basket of sovereign currencies.10It should be no surprise that Facebook's Libra is attracting a high level of scrutiny from lawmakers and authorities.11 Libra, and indeed any stablecoin project with global scale and scope, must address a core set of legal and regulatory challenges before it can facilitate a first payment. I will emphasize a few issues in particular. First, compliance with know-your-customer rules and regulations are essential to ensure stablecoins are not used for illegal activities and illicit finance. Libra's business model is inherently cross-border, and, as such, each participant in the system deemed to be a financial institution would need to ensure compliance with each national jurisdictions' anti-money-laundering laws. Libra's intended global reach would likely necessitate a consistent global anti-money-laundering framework in order to reduce the risk of illicit transactions. Second, issuers of stablecoins designed to facilitate consumer payments must clearly demonstrate how consumer protections would be assured. Consumers will need to be educated on how their rights differ with respect to digital wallets compared to bank accounts. In the United States, as elsewhere, statutory and regulatory protections have been implemented with respect to bank accounts so that consumers can reasonably expect their deposits to be insured up to a limit; fraudulent transactions to be the liability of the bank; transfers to be available within specified periods; and clear, standardized disclosures about account fees and interest payments. Not only is it not clear whether comparable protections will be in place with Libra, or what recourse consumers will have, but it is not even clear how much price risk consumers will face since they do not appear to have rights to the stablecoin's underlying assets. Consumers need to be cautioned that stablecoins are likely to be starkly different from sovereign-issued currency in legal terms. It will be important to get clarity on what legal entity can be held responsible for the security of personally identifiable information and transaction data and how personal data will be stored, accessed, and used. The large number of cyber breaches in the last few years highlight the importance of these issues. Third, it will be necessary to define the financial activities that the various players in the Libra ecosystem are conducting in order for jurisdictions to assess whether existing regulatory and enforcement mechanisms are adequate. As the legal domicile of the Libra Association, Switzerland is of particular interest. Swiss authorities have established three new categories to facilitate their approach of regulating by function: "payment tokens" are cryptocurrencies that are meant for use in payments or value transfers; "utility tokens" are blockchain-based applications; and "asset tokens" are cryptoassets that are analogous to equities, bonds, and derivatives.12To the extent that some innovations do not fit neatly within a single category, these classifications may not be mutually exclusive. In the United States, regulators are closely examining the specific functions of particular stablecoins and cryptocurrencies more broadly to determine whether and where they fit in the existing regulatory structure and whether additional authorities or guidance is necessary. U.S. market regulators have authorities for products judged to be securities or commodity futures under relevant law. At the state level, the New York State Department of Financial Services has established a BitLicense for entities associated with virtual currencies.13The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have supervisory authority over banks, including, in many cases, the ability to regulate and examine companies that provide services to banks. Neither the Federal Reserve nor any other regulator has plenary authority over payment systems operating in the United States. Although the Financial Stability Oversight Council does have the authority to designate systemically important nonbank financial companies; financial market utilities; or payment, clearing, and settlement activities based on the facts of the specific situation, it is not clear at this time whether any cryptocurrency issuer would meet the statutory requirements for designation. Stablecoins, and cryptocurrencies more generally, challenge the long-held premise that payments must be recorded in a central ledger managed by a single entity. In fact, banks were established to perform this central ledger function. Distributed ledger technology allows for the direct peer-to-peer transfer of assets, potentially eliminating the need to transact through intermediaries. While distributed ledger technology could offer advantages by enhancing operational resilience, increasing transparency, and simplifying recordkeeping, the public and immutable nature of the transactions ledger also introduces risks, such as data privacy concerns and legal complexity. Global stablecoin networks also may pose challenges to bank business models. In the extreme, widespread migration to one or more global stablecoin networks could disintermediate the role of banks in payments. If consumers and businesses reduce their deposits at commercial banks in favor of stablecoins held in digital wallets, this could shrink banks' sources of stable funding, as well as their visibility into transactions data, and thereby hinder banks' ability to provide credit to businesses and households. That said, many banks are likely to adapt by offering alternative methods of peer-to-peer settlement and by incorporating stablecoins into their business models, whether by partnering with fintech firms who issue stablecoins or by issuing their own, as some are already doing.14 Moreover, widespread adoption of stablecoins could have implications for the role of central banks and monetary policy. Payments are the economy's circulatory system. Large-scale migration into a new stablecoin network for purposes of payments may prove to be the leading edge of a broader migration. If a large share of domestic households and businesses come to rely on a global stablecoin not only as a means of payment but also as a store of value, this could shrink demand for physical cash and affect the size of the central bank's balance sheet. The central bank's approach to implementing monetary policy may be complicated to the extent that banks' participation in short-term funding markets is affected. These effects are likely to be more significant for small, open economies or those with weak monetary institutions, where the migration away from the sovereign currency to a global stablecoin could weaken the scope for independent monetary policy through a process that is the digital analogue of dollarization.15Large-scale stablecoin use could also affect larger, advanced economies with extensive connections to the global financial system, including by increasing market volatility and by transmitting shocks across borders. Finally, there are likely to be financial stability risks for a stablecoin network with global reach. If not managed effectively, liquidity, credit, market, or operational risks—alone or in combination—could trigger a loss of confidence and a classic run. A global stablecoin network raises complicated issues associated with many legally independent but interdependent operations, and the lack of clarity about the management of reserves and the rights and responsibilities of various market participants in the network. The potential for risks and spillovers could be amplified by potential ambiguity surrounding the ability of official authorities to provide oversight and backstop liquidity and to collaborate across borders. Central Bank Digital CurrenciesEven before the advent of stablecoins, the rapid migration of payments to digital systems prompted interest in the issuance of central bank digital currencies. In some jurisdictions, there has already been a pronounced migration from cash to digital payments, which naturally prompts monetary authorities to explore moving to digital issuance of their own. The potential for global stablecoin systems has intensified the interest in central bank digital currencies. Proponents argue that central bank digital currencies would be a safer alternative to privately issued stablecoins because they would be a direct liability of the central bank.16For instance, Markus Brunnermeier, Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau provide important arguments.17 Of course, the Federal Reserve and other central banks already provide money digitally in the form of central bank deposits in traditional reserve or settlement accounts. However, in the current context, central bank digital currency typically refers to a new type of central bank liability that could be held directly by households and businesses without the involvement of a commercial bank intermediary. Under this definition, central bank digital currency could be a flexible form of central bank money that could differ from traditional reserves along three dimensions: a much broader set of institutions and individuals could access it, some types of balances might not pay interest, and it might entail greater government visibility into end users' transactions. In the United States, there are compelling advantages to the current system. First, physical cash in circulation for the U.S. dollar continues to rise, suggesting robust demand.18Second, the dollar is an important reserve currency globally, and maintaining public trust in the sovereign currency is paramount. Third, we have a robust banking system that meets the needs of consumers: our banks are many in number, diverse in size, and geographically dispersed. Finally, we have a widely available and expanding variety of digital payment options that build on the existing institutional framework and the applicable safeguards. Moreover, central bank digital currency for general purpose use—that is, for individual consumer use—would raise profound legal, policy, and operational questions.19Let's consider the balance between privacy and illicit activity. If it is designed to be financially transparent and provide safeguards against illicit activity, a central bank digital currency for consumer use could conceivably require the central bank to keep a running record of all payment data using the digital currency—a stark difference from cash, for instance. A system in which individual payments information would be recorded by a government entity would mark a dramatic shift. A related question is whether the Federal Reserve has the authority to issue currency in digital form and, if necessary, to establish digital wallets for the public. There could also be profound monetary policy implications. Some economists have argued that a central bank digital currency could address the problems posed by the zero lower bound by potentially transmitting monetary policy directly to the public. Executing monetary policy in such a manner would effectively imply the elimination of all physical cash and the power to impose a negative rate, or a tax, on households' holdings of digital money. My own strong preference is to address the effective lower bound by using our existing tools vigorously, since I view the cost-benefit assessment of negative rates as unattractive for the current U.S. context. Financial stability considerations are also important. The ability to convert commercial bank deposits into central bank digital currency with a simple swipe surely has the potential to be a run accelerant. Here, too, the role of banks in providing financial intermediation services could be fundamentally altered. Finally, there could be operational risks to introducing a central bank digital currency. For starters, this might require the Federal Reserve to develop the operating capacity to access or manage individual accounts, which could number in the hundreds of millions. A myriad of other operational challenges would need to be addressed, including electronic counterfeiting and cyber risks. It is worth noting that the technologies used currently for private-sector digital currencies do not provide the same level of information technology reliability, integrity, and scalability as central bank systems in use today. Many of these technologies do not provide for clear, predictable, and final settlement, which is a core tenet of payment systems.20 That said, some jurisdictions may move in this direction faster than others, based on the particular attributes of their payments and currency systems. At the Federal Reserve, we will continue to analyze the potential benefits and costs of central bank digital currencies and look forward to learning from other central banks. Supporting Payments InnovationWhile prudence cautions against rushing into untested approaches to central bank digital currencies, we are actively investing in our payments infrastructure, so that everyone has access to real-time payments. Every day, U.S. payment and securities settlement systems turn over roughly $12.5 trillion.21The Federal Reserve is committed to working closely with the private sector to promote a safer and more efficient payments system.22 This summer, we announced that the Federal Reserve will launch the first new payment service in more than 40 years to help make real-time payments available to everyone.23The Federal Reserve will develop the FedNowSMService as a platform for consumers and businesses to send and receive payments immediately and securely 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. This initiative is intended to provide a neutral platform for new private-sector innovation in faster payment services. In addition to FedNow, we are exploring enhancements to same-day settlement of automated clearinghouse (ACH) transactions and expansion of Fedwire®Funds Service and National Settlement System operating hours. We are working with the industry to improve the security of the payments system by, for example, increasing understanding of synthetic identity fraud and identifying a fraud classification approach to improve information sharing. As the public and private sectors work to reduce payment frictions, one of the most important use cases is for cross-border payments, such as remittances. Intermediation chains for cross-border payments are long, slow, cumbersome, and opaque. Technology enables e-commerce to transcend national borders, but current cross-border payments solutions often represent complicated workarounds rather than seamless end-to-end solutions. Authorities in different jurisdictions recognize the importance of cooperating across borders with each other and the private sector to address the very real cross-border frictions that exist today. Concluding ThoughtsOur nation has rich and varied experiences to draw on as we assess various proposals for private money, from the period in our history when the colonial states each issued their own currencies to the many decades when the circulation of private commercial banknotes stood in for a national currency. The Federal Reserve was created in part to respond to the inability of many of these banks to make good on their obligations for the banknotes they issued and the panics and runs that ensued. Those experiences will help inform us as we potentially enter another phase in the evolution of money and payments. Today, consumers and businesses have a variety of payment options, including physical cash, checks, ACH transfers, debit cards and credit cards, and mobile-based payment solutions, to name a few. These tend to have clearly defined legal rights and responsibilities. We will likely see far-reaching innovation in payments in the coming years, with a plethora of new and emerging options, including stablecoins. The Federal Reserve remains confident in the power of technology and innovation to transform the financial system and reduce frictions and delays, while preserving consumer protections, data privacy and security, financial stability, and monetary policy transmission and guarding against illicit activity and cyber risks. Given the stakes, global stablecoin networks should be expected to meet a high threshold of legal and regulatory safeguards before launching operations. We are monitoring new technologies closely to ensure that the innovations that arise fit with our operational responsibilities and broader public policy goals, as reflected in the Federal Reserve Act. At the same time, we are upgrading our services to support innovation in new ways. And, we will continue to foster a safe and efficient payments system, including where money in all its myriad forms—present and future—is concerned, as we have for over a century. 1. I am grateful to Paul Wong and Jean Flemming of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Seehttps://libra.org/en-US/.Return to text 3. In many jurisdictions, the termmoneyis defined narrowly by the law as only sovereign currency.Return to text 4. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Distributed Ledger Technology: Implications for Payments, Clearing, and Settlement" (speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting Panel on Blockchain, Washington, October 7, 2016); "The Use of Distributed Ledger Technologies in Payment, Clearing, and Settlement" (speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, Washington, April 14, 2016);andCommittee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI),Distributed Ledger Technology in Payment, Clearing, and Settlement(PDF), February 2017.Return to text 5. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Cryptocurrencies, Digital Currencies, and Distributed Ledger Technologies: What Are We Learning?" (speech delivered at the Decoding Digital Currency Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, May 15, 2018).Return to text 6. Statistics (October 15, 2019), retrieved from https://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/.Return to text 7. Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems,The Role of Central Bank Money in Payment Systems(PDF)(Basel: Bank for International Settlements, August 2003).Return to text 8. Starbucks,Fiscal 2018 Annual Report, https://s22.q4cdn.com/869488222/files/doc_financials/annual/2018/2018-Annual-Report.pdf.Return to text 9. Frank Tang and Doug Palmer, "U.S.-China Trade War Deal Could Be Too Late for the Likes of Mastercard, American Express and Visa,"South China Morning Post, April 2, 2019.Return to text 10. Based on staff calculations using statistics from Statistics (October 15, 2019), retrieved from https://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/,and U.S. and World Population Clock (October 15, 2019), retrieved fromhttps://www.census.gov/popclock/.Return to text 11. See Benoît Coeuré, "Digital Challenges to the International Monetary and Financial System," (speech at the Future of the International Monetary System at the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg-Toulouse School of Economics, Luxembourg, September 17, 2019).Return to text 12. See Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority, "Guidelines for Enquiries Regarding the Regulatory Framework for Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs)," February 16, 2018.Return to text 13. Seehttps://www.dfs.ny.gov/apps_and_licensing/virtual_currency_businesses.Return to text 14. See, e.g., https://www.jpmorgan.com/global/news/digital-coin-payments and https://newsroom.wf.com/press-release/innovation-and-technology/wells-fargo-pilot-internal-settlement-service-using.Return to text 15. See, e.g., Christine Lagarde, "Central Banking and Fintech—A Brave New World?" (speech delivered at the Bank of England conference, London, September 29, 2017).Return to text 16. See, e.g., Martin Sandbu, "How Facebook's Libra Fuelled Push for Central Bank-Run Digital Currencies,"Financial Times, September 23, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/746808a0-d9f6-11e9-8f9b-77216ebe1f17; and Dave Michaels and Paul Vigna, "The Coming Currency War: Digital Money vs. the Dollar,"The Wall Street Journal, September 22, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-coming-currency-war-digital-money-vs-the-dollar-11569204540?mod=hp_featst_pos3.Return to text 17. See e.g., Markus K. Brunnermeier, Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau, "The Digitalization of Money (PDF)," Working Paper, August 2019.Return to text 18. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/coin_data.htm.Return to text 19. See, e.g., CPMI and Markets Committee,Central Bank Digital Currencies(PDF), March 2018.Return to text 20. Many distributed ledgers in existence today rely on probabilistic settlement, meaning that the more times a transaction is confirmed on the ledger, the less likely it will be revoked, but a non-zero risk of settlement failure persists.Return to text 21. Based on staff estimates.Return to text 22. See, e.g.,https://fedpaymentsimprovement.org/.Return to text 23. Lael Brainard, "Delivering Fast Payments for All" (speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, August 5, 2019); Lael Brainard, "Supporting Fast Payments for All," (speech delivered at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018).Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation In keeping with ongoing initiatives to increase transparency and improve efficiency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Federal Reserve Board are inviting public comment on their use of the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System, also known as the CAMELS rating system. The agencies seek comments on the consistency of ratings assigned under the CAMELS system. The agencies are also interested in comments concerning how they use CAMELS ratings in enforcement actions and in reviewing bank applications. The agencies' outreach is on CAMELS ratings is consistent with their commitment to provide opportunities for public feedback on issues affecting supervised institutions. Because comments will be made public, submitters should not include confidential rating and examination information. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication of the agencies' request for information in theFederal Register.
Federal bank regulatory agencies finalized a rule that simplifies capital requirements for community banks by allowing them to adopt a simple leverage ratio to measure capital adequacy. The community bank leverage ratio framework removes requirements for calculating and reporting risk-based capital ratios for a qualifying community bank that opts into the framework. To qualify for the framework, a community bank must have less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets, limited amounts of off-balance-sheet exposures and trading assets and liabilities, and a leverage ratio greater than 9 percent. In response to public comments and outreach, the final rule was modified from the November 2018 proposal to reduce compliance burden while maintaining safety and soundness for qualifying community banks. In particular, the community bank leverage ratio incorporates tier 1 capital as the numerator. In addition, a community bank that falls out of compliance with the framework will have a two-quarter grace period to come back into full compliance, provided its leverage ratio remains above 8 percent. A bank will be deemed well-capitalized during the grace period. The agencies estimate approximately 85 percent of community banks will qualify for the community bank leverage ratio framework. The final rule is consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The community bank leverage ratio framework will first be available for banking organizations to use in their March 31, 2020, Call Report or Form FR Y-9C, as applicable. Banking organizations can opt into or out of the community bank leverage ratio framework in a subsequent Call Report or Form FR Y-9C, as applicable. The agencies have prepared a compliance guide to accompany the rule. In addition, the agencies finalized a rule to allow non-advanced approaches banks, including community banks, to elect to adopt simplifying changes to the capital rule beginning on January 1, 2020, a quarter earlier than the mandatory compliance date of April 1, 2020. The agencies issued the simplifying changes in July 2019. Federal Registernotice 1HTML Federal Registernotice 2HTML Community Bank Leverage Ratio Framework: Community Bank Compliance Guide (PDF)
Four federal financial regulatory agencies today requested comment on a proposed Interagency Policy Statement on Allowances for Credit Losses. This proposed policy statement is intended to promote consistency in the interpretation and application of the Financial Accounting Standards Board's (FASB) credit losses accounting standard, which introduces the current expected credit losses (CECL) methodology. The proposed interagency policy statement describes the measurement of expected credit losses using the CECL methodology and updates concepts and practices detailed in existing supervisory guidance that remain applicable. CECL is effective for most public financial institutions beginning in 2020, and the FASB recently decided to defer the effective date of CECL for all other institutions to 2023. The proposed interagency policy statement would be effective at the time of each institution's adoption of the credit losses accounting standard. The agencies also are requesting comment on the proposed Interagency Guidance on Credit Risk Review Systems. The guidance presents principles for establishing a system of independent, ongoing credit risk review in accordance with safety and soundness standards. The proposals were issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Comments on each proposal will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Proposed Interagency Policy Statement on Allowances for Credit Losses (PDF) Proposed Interagency Guidance on Credit Risk Review Systems (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Absa Bank Limited, Johannesburg, South Africa, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Magnolia Banking Corporation, Magnolia, Arkansas, to acquire Prescott Bancshares, Inc. ("Prescott"), and thereby indirectly acquire Prescott's subsidiary bank, Bank of Prescott, both of Prescott, Arkansas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the inaugural 21 members of the Insurance Policy Advisory Committee (IPAC). The IPAC provides information, advice, and recommendations to the Federal Reserve Board on domestic and international insurance issues, including negotiations at the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). The inaugural IPAC members include expertise in life insurance, property and casualty insurance, and reinsurance. Members have professional backgrounds in insurance accounting, actuarial science, academia, insurance regulation, policyholder advocacy, capital markets, and other areas. The inaugural IPAC members will serve staggered terms ranging from one to three years. Starting next year, the Board intends to annually appoint new members to the IPAC to serve three-year terms. Members Keith BellTravelersSenior Vice President, Corporate Finance Birny BirnbaumCenter for Economic JusticeExecutive Director John BrunoThe Auto Club GroupExecutive Vice President, General Counsel, Secretary & Chief Human Resources Officer Joseph EngelhardMetLifeSenior Vice President, Head of Regulatory Policy Group Bridget HaganThe Cypress GroupPartner, Head of Insurance Practice Group Halina von dem HagenManulifeGlobal Treasurer and Head of Capital Management Michael FerikGuardianChief Financial Officer Tom FinnellFinnell & Co. LLCOwnerFormer Vice Chair of the IAIS's Capital Solvency and Field Testing Working Group William HinesMillimanPrincipal & Consulting Actuary Laura LazarczykZurich InsuranceChief Legal Officer of Zurich North America Michael LockermanPricewaterhouseCoopers LLPPrincipal Patricia McCoyBoston College Law SchoolLiberty Mutual Insurance Professor of Law Julie Mix McPeakGreenberg Traurig, LLPFormer President of the NAIC and Vice Chair of IAIS's Executive Committee Wayne PeacockUSAAPresident, Property & Casualty Group Maurice PerkinsAegonSenior Vice President, Global Head of Government & Policy Affairs Pooja RahmanNew York LifeVice President and Head of Financial Risk Management Angela RipleyVW Brown Insurance ServicePresident Kevin RootChurch MutualExecutive Vice President, Operations Aaron SarfattiAXA Equitable LifeChief Risk Officer Gray SchweitzerHSBCHead of U.S. Financial Institutions Group Debt Capital Markets Joseph SieverlingReinsurance Association of AmericaSenior Vice President and Director of Financial Services For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Insurance Policy Advisory Committee
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it is seeking to permanently bar Mai Ly-Vu, a former branch manager and vice president of Pacific Premier Bank, Irvine, California, from employment in the banking industry and to require her payment of $18,700 in restitution to the bank. Ly-Vu is alleged to have engaged in unsafe or unsound banking practices and breach of fiduciary duty by failing to disclose her personal financial interests in extensions of credit by the bank to companies owned by her husband and other members of her immediate family. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced four new members of its Community Advisory Council (CAC). The new members will serve three-year terms beginning in 2020. The CAC is composed of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer, workforce, and community development organizations and interests, including from such fields as affordable housing, economic development, labor, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members provide information, advice, and recommendations to the Board on relevant policy matters and emerging issues of interest. The new members of the CAC were selected from a pool of respondents to the Board's public call for applications. These members will replace: Andrea Levere, former chair; Barrett Burns; Vanessa Calderon-Rosado; and Gerry Roll, whose terms expire at the end of 2019.The new members of the CAC are: Dr. Susan BradburyProfessor, Community and Regional PlanningIowa State UniversityAmes, Iowa Tawney BrunschExecutive DirectorLakota FundsKyle, S.D. Stephanie MackayChief Innovation OfficerColumbus Community CenterSalt Lake City, Utah Lora SmithExecutive DirectorAppalachian Impact FundHazard, Ky. These individuals will join 11 existing members. The CAC is scheduled to meet May 14 and October 1, 2020. Records of previous meetings may be found atwww.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cac.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Thursday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Dallas decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2-1/2 percent to 2-1/4 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday finalized rules that tailor its regulations for domestic and foreign banks to more closely match their risk profiles. The rules reduce compliance requirements for firms with less risk while maintaining the most stringent requirements for the largest and most complex banks. The rules establish a framework that sorts banks with $100 billion or more in total assets into four different categories based on several factors, including asset size, cross-jurisdictional activity, reliance on short-term wholesale funding, nonbank assets, and off-balance sheet exposure. Significant levels of these factors result in risk and complexity to a bank and can in turn bring risk to the financial system and broader economy. The rules build on the Board's existing practice of tailoring its requirements and are consistent with changes made by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. "Our rules keep the toughest requirements on the largest and most complex firms," Chair Jerome H. Powell said. "In this way, the rules maintain the fundamental strength and resiliency that has been built into our financial system over the past decade." While generally similar to the proposals released for comment over the past year, the final rules simplify the proposals by applying liquidity standards to a foreign bank's U.S. intermediate holding company (IHC) based on the risk profile of the IHC, rather than on the combined U.S. operations of the foreign bank. Additionally, for larger firms, the final rules apply standardized liquidity requirements at the higher end of the range that was proposed for both domestic and foreign banks. "The final rules maintain our objective from the proposals: develop a regulatory framework that more closely ties regulatory requirements to underlying risk," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. As the attached chart indicates, firms in the lowest risk category will have reduced compliance requirements, owing to their smaller risk profile. As the risk of a firm increases and it moves into a new risk category, its requirements will increase. The Board estimates that the changes in the aggregate will result in a 0.6 percent decrease in required capital and a reduction of 2 percent of required liquid assets for all banks with assets of $100 billion or more. The rules do not reduce capital or liquidity requirements for firms in the highest risk categories, including U.S. global systemically important banks. The regulatory capital and liquidity aspects of the rules were jointly developed with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The rules will be effective 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Tailoring RuleFederal Registernotice #1 Tailoring RuleFederal Registernotice #2 Fee ProposalFederal Registernotice (PDF)Note: The correct comment period end date is 01-09-2020. The comment period end date originally published by the Federal Register on November 12, 2019 was incorrect. Visual (PDF) Orders Delegating Authority to Make Certain Determinations under Regulation LL and Regulation YY, and under Regulation QQ (PDF) Opening Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Opening Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on October 10, 2019
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition against John D. Evans, former employee of Columbus Bank & Trust, Columbus, Georgia, for embezzling client funds for his own benefit. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition against Timothy McMillian, former employee of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for using confidential customer account information for personal gain. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition against Michael Joseph Erickson, former employee of Southern Bancorp Bank, Arkadelphia, Arkansas, for embezzling bank funds for his own benefit. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between August 6, 2019, and August 20, 2019, and includes responses from banks that held three quarters of total reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The August 2019 survey is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed investment and exports remain weak. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pressures, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. This action supports the Committee's view that sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective are the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook remain. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action were: Esther L. George and Eric S. Rosengren, who preferred at this meeting to maintain the target range at 1-3/4 percent to 2 percent. Implementation Note issued October 30, 2019
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Nontraditional Data, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing in Macroeconomics," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. Good morning, and welcome to the Federal Reserve Board's research conference "Nontraditional Data, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing in Macroeconomics." Here at the Fed, we are continually assessing the current state of the economy, updating our outlook for economic activity, and estimating the risks around that outlook. In this environment, we assess a broad array of government and private-sector data to determine what they imply for the achievement of the Fed's statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. As a result, this conference and the range of topics on your agenda for today and tomorrow are highly relevant for us. More timely and accurate information sourced from nontraditional data and the use of new techniques should permit Board staff economists to make better estimates of the evolving news and what it implies for the economic outlook and allow policymakers to make better-informed decisions. Over these next two days, you will hear about the use of new tools and nontraditional data sources and what they say for the assessment of inflation and the labor market; about the use of new methods for forecasting; and about extracting information from text and using textual analysis to evaluate regulatory complexity and understand central bank communications. You no doubt will have many conversations in this room and during breaks about the usefulness of big data and new techniques for macroeconomic analysis. I am pleased to see some former colleagues and important contributors to macroeconomics and measurement on your conference program, such as Erica Groshen; Ron Jarmin; Matthew Shapiro; Hal Varian; and David Wilcox, who recently left the Fed for other pastures. I would also like to acknowledge the diversity this conference offers. This conference is interdisciplinary, bringing together people from many different fields of study—economists, computer scientists, and statisticians—as well as people from many different types of institutions, including universities, central bank research departments, statistical agencies, and the private sector. We all stand to benefit from work across disciplines, and the connections forged at conferences such as this one can be highly fruitful. To a large extent, the use of nontraditional data, machine learning, and natural language processing in macroeconomics and for policy is only just in its infancy. In many cases, we are unsure of the efficacy or benefits of these approaches. Coordination between statistical agencies and policymaking institutions will help us achieve our shared goal—a better understanding of the economy. To this end, the discussions on the use of big data and new techniques for central banking and on the possibilities for cooperation between private companies and government agencies should be particularly helpful. Moreover, I strongly encourage you to continue your discussions after the conference ends and to seek opportunities for joint work so that we can further develop our understanding of big data and textual analysis. Now I would like to invite the participants in the session on alternative data on inflation and the labor market to come to the podium. Welcome to the Federal Reserve, and I wish you a successful two days.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings on August 26 and September 18, 2019. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 17-18, 2019. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 17-18, 2019:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Monetary Policy’s Impact on Workers and Their Communities," a Fed Listens event, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Thank you, President Evans, for hosting this event today, and to our moderator and participants for taking part in this valuable discussion. Today's event is the last in our series ofFed Listensevents held across the country to learn about how Americans think about monetary policy and how they think about the Federal Reserve. In keeping with the purpose ofFed Listens, I would like to spend most of our time in conversation. But I do want to offer a few thoughts about why the Fed is reaching out to seek a broad range of views, and what we are hoping to accomplish through this initiative. Fed Listensis a new comprehensive outreach to the public on monetary policy. For many decades there was a sense at the Board that the public wasn't interested or even willing to dive into the complexities of monetary policy. That view has changed in a fundamental way, especially in the aftermath of the financial crisis when it was urgently important that the public understand what we were doing. So we began explaining as accessibly and as clearly as we could what we were doing and why. Now we are listening carefully. Since I became a Board member almost a year ago, it has become clear to me that people are not only willing to engage on complex economic issues, but they also want to know that their concerns are being taken into consideration on issues that affect their financial well-being. The Fed's movement toward greater transparency and public engagement is well underway, and advancing that effort is one of my top priorities. At the same time, we recognize that the clear communication of our policies actually helps us achieve our goals. When we communicate our views on the economic outlook and our expectations for where interest rates may be heading, consumers and businesses take that information into account when making decisions on spending, investment, and hiring. For that reason, our policy communications are an important part of the Fed's toolkit for influencing the direction of the economy. Fed Listensis a natural outcome of this commitment to public engagement. We have heard from many people from different parts of the country and from different sectors of the economy about how monetary policy affects them and their communities. It is our responsibility as a public institution to be accountable to the public. Hearing a broad range of perspectives on these issues will help us make good decisions as we consider new approaches to monetary policy. As I mentioned before, this afternoon's discussion is the last in a series ofFed Listensevents that we began back in February. Looking at the depth of experience of our panelists and of David Wessel, our distinguished moderator, I think we can make a strong case that we saved the best for last. Our first panel focuses on disadvantaged workers' long-term job prospects. I am eager to hear from our panelists how they think the labor market and our policies are impacting the communities they serve in Illinois, Michigan, and in other states in the Midwest. As a former community banker, I am also very interested to hear from people who are implementing creative strategies to build wealth and support access to credit for low- and moderate-income communities. The panelists in our second session can speak to their experiences doing just that, because they are helping to bring credit and housing opportunities to Appalachia, Indianapolis as well as right here in Chicago. Our monetary policy review will have implications for financial markets, but we also want to know more about what the impact will be on Main Street. My colleagues and I are keenly aware of our responsibility to focus on how the decisions we make affect the real economy for people in communities all across the country. The two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices—are determined by the Congress and are not subject to our framework review. How we reach those goals is the topic for discussion. One question I hope to explore is whether we need new strategies to more effectively achieve our goals. For example, inflation has run modestly below our 2 percent objective for many years. Given that, it would be helpful to hear whether you think the Federal Open Market Committee should consider strategies that aim to have inflation exceed our target for a period of time to make up for the earlier shortfall or whether you think that would threaten the decades of success the Fed has had keeping the public's inflation expectations low and stable. Another question concerns the Fed's existing toolkit for monetary policy. Currently, our available policy tools include setting interest rates, purchasing longer-term assets, and forward guidance about the expected future path of policy. Are there other tools we should consider to help us reach and sustain our objectives more effectively? I also want to know how the Federal Open Market Committee's communication of its policy framework might be improved. How can we help you better understand our work so you can hold us accountable? Your perspectives on questions like these are a vital part of this monetary policy review. So I want to thank you again for your time and your contributions. Once the policy review is complete, we will share our findings with the public, probably during the first half of next year. I look forward to our discussion. Fed Listens Events
Chair Jerome H. Powell At a “Community Listening Session," a Fed Listens event at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri Good morning. I am happy to be here in Kansas City for the 13th of 14Fed Listensevents. I look forward to hearing the perspectives of the community and business leaders participating today. The Reserve Banks and the Board have been holdingFed Listensevents around the country as part of a comprehensive and public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. Almost all of theFed Listensmeetings, like this one, have been open to the press and live-streamed on the internet. Both the breadth and transparency of the review are unprecedented for us. One reason we are conducting this review is that it is always a good practice for any organization to occasionally take a step back and ask if it could be doing its job more effectively. But we must pose that question not just to ourselves. Because Congress has granted the Federal Reserve significant protections from short-term political pressures, we have an obligation to clearly explain what we are doing and why. And we have an obligation to actively engage the people we serve so that they and their elected representatives can hold us accountable. We have invited you here because we want to better understand how monetary policy affects your lives and the lives of the people your organizations represent. We want to hear your perspective on maximum employment and price stability—the monetary policy goals Congress has assigned us. Now is a good time to conduct the review. Unemployment is at a half-century low, and inflation is running close to, but a bit below, our 2 percent objective. While not everyone fully shares economic opportunities and the economy faces some risks, overall, it is—as I like to say—in a good place. Our job is to keep it there as long as possible. While we believe our strategy and tools have been and remain effective, the U.S. economy, like other advanced economies around the world, is facing some longer-term challenges—from low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates. While slow growth is obviously not good, you may be asking, "What's wrong with low inflation and low interest rates?" Low can be good, but when inflation—and, consequently, interest rates—are too low, the Fed and other central banks have less room to cut rates to support the economy during downturns. So, in this review, we are examining strategies that might better allow us to symmetrically and sustainably achieve 2 percent inflation. Doing so would help prevent inflation expectations among consumers, businesses, and investors from slipping too low, as they appear to have done in several advanced economies. More-firmly anchored expectations, in a virtuous circle, would help keep actual inflation around our target, thus preserving our ability to change interest rates as appropriate to meet our mandate. We are also looking at whether our existing monetary policy tools will be adequate when the next downturn comes. Finally, we are asking whether our communications practices can be improved to better support the effectiveness of our policy. After today, we have oneFed Listenssession remaining, later this month in Chicago. At the July meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, my colleagues and I began discussing what we have learned so far from theFed Listensevents. We continued that discussion at our September meeting and have a lot left to do. We plan to publicly report our conclusions during the first half of next year. One clear takeaway of the sessions so far is the importance of sustaining this historically strong job market. People from low- and moderate-income communities tell us that this long recovery, now in its 11th year, is benefiting them and their neighbors to a degree that has not been felt for many years. Employers are partnering with community colleges and nonprofit organizations to offer training. And people who have struggled to stay in the workforce in the past are getting new opportunities. Once again, I'm happy to be here. Now it is your turn to speak. We're listening.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Perspectives on Maximum Employment and Price Stability" a Fed Listens event sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon. Welcome to the room where members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the 12 Reserve Banks meet eight times a year—most recently, two weeks ago—to decide the stance of monetary policy. It's a magnificent, formal—perhaps even imposing—room, with 26-foot ceilings, a monumental marble fireplace, and a 1,000-pound brass and glass chandelier. It's seen a lot of history since Franklin Roosevelt dedicated this building in 1937. British and American military leaders conferred here during World War II. And, through the decades, our Federal Reserve predecessors grappled with financial turmoil and the economy's ups and downs. So when my colleagues and I take our assigned places around this polished mahogany and granite table, the setting and its history lends a certain formality—dare I say, stuffiness—to the proceedings. As we kick off this 12th of 14Fed Listensevents,Governor Brainard, Governor Bowman, and I hope that today's meeting is anything but stuffy. Candid and serious, yes. But not stuffy. The Reserve Banks and the Board have been holdingFed Listensevents around the country as part of a comprehensive and public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. Almost all of theFed Listensmeetings, like this one, have been open to the press and live-streamed on the internet. Both the breadth and transparency of the review are unprecedented for us. One reason we are conducting this review is that it is always a good practice for any organization to occasionally take a step back and ask if it could be doing its job more effectively. But we must pose that question not just to ourselves. Because Congress has granted the Federal Reserve significant protections from short-term political pressures, we have an obligation to clearly explain what we are doing and why. And we have an obligation to actively engage the people we serve so that they and their elected representatives can hold us accountable. We've invited you here because we want to better understand how monetary policy affects the lives of the people your organizations represent—union members, small business owners, residents of low- and moderate-income communities, retirees, and others. We want to hear your perspective on maximum employment and price stability—the monetary policy goals Congress has assigned us. Now is a good time to conduct the review. Unemployment is near a half-century low, and inflation is running close to, but a bit below, our 2 percent objective. While not everyone fully shares economic opportunities and the economy faces some risks, overall it is—as I like to say—in a good place. Our job is to keep it there as long as possible. While we believe our strategy and tools have been and remain effective, the U.S. economy, like other advanced economies around the world, is facing some longer-term challenges—from low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates. While slow growth is obviously not good, you may be asking, "What's wrong with low inflation and low interest rates?" Low can be good, but when inflation—and, consequently, interest rates—are too low, the Fed and other central banks have less room to cut rates to support the economy during downturns. So, in this review, we are examining strategies that might better allow us to symmetrically and sustainably achieve 2 percent inflation. Doing so would help prevent inflation expectations among consumers, businesses, and investors from slipping too low, as they appear to have done in several advanced economies. More-firmly anchored expectations, in a virtuous circle, would help keep actual inflation around our target, thus preserving our ability to change interest rates as appropriate to meet our mandate. We are also looking at whether our existing monetary policy tools will be adequate when the next downturn comes. Finally, we are asking whether our communications practices can be improved to better support the effectiveness of our policy. After today, we have twoFed Listenssessions remaining, both later this month: one in Kansas City and another in Chicago. At the July meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, my colleagues and I began discussing what we've learned so far from theFed Listensevents. We continued that discussion at our September meeting and have a lot left to do. We plan to publicly report our conclusions during the first half of next year. One clear takeaway of the sessions so far is the importance of sustaining our historically strong job market. People from low- and moderate-income communities tell us this long recovery, now in its 11th year, is benefiting them and their neighbors to a degree that has not been felt for many years. Employers are partnering with community colleges and nonprofit organizations to offer training. And people who have struggled to stay in the workforce in the past are getting new opportunities. Once again, welcome. Now it is your turn to speak. We're listening.
Consistent with its January 2019 Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, the Committee reaffirms its intention to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve's administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. To ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample, the Committee approved by notation vote completed on October 11, 2019 the following steps: These actions are purely technical measures to support the effective implementation of the FOMC's monetary policy, and do not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. The Committee will continue to monitor money market developments as it assesses the level of reserves most consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation. The Committee stands ready to adjust the details of these plans as necessary to foster efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. In connection with these plans, the Federal Open Market Committee voted unanimously to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: "Effective October 15, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1-3/4 to 2 percent. In light of recent and expected increases in the Federal Reserve's non-reserve liabilities, the Committee directs the Desk to purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September 2019. The Committee also directs the Desk to conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations at least through January of next year to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. In addition, the Committee directs the Desk to conduct overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.70 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be reinvested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be reinvested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency mortgage-backed securities transactions." More information about these plans may be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York'swebsite. Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases and Repurchase Operations FAQs: Repurchase Agreement Operations FAQs: Treasury Reserve Management and Reinvestment Purchases
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that Steven B. Kamin will be stepping down as director of the Division of International Finance, effective early next year. Kamin will serve as a senior adviser to the division and will retire after a successor has transitioned into the role. Kamin began his 34-year Federal Reserve career as a research assistant at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. He joined the staff of the Federal Reserve Board in 1987 as an economist in the Emerging Market Economies section of the division. In 1995 he was presented with the Board's Special Achievement Award for his work on the Mexican financial crisis, and he was appointed to the official staff in 1999. In his role as director, Steve oversees the division's work on monitoring and forecasting the global economy, analyzing key international issues such as movements in global financial and commodity markets, and supporting the Federal Reserve's engagement with foreign central banks and international organizations such as the Group of Seven, Group of Twenty, and Bank for International Settlements (BIS). "Steve's friends and colleagues at the Board have benefited greatly from his insightful analysis of the global economy," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell. "During his lengthy tenure here, Steve has come to be known for his vision, leadership, energy, and quick wit." Kamin has also served as a visiting economist at the BIS, a senior economist for the White House Council of Economic Advisers, and a consultant for the World Bank. He has published widely in the fields of international macroeconomics and finance. Kamin holds a bachelor's degree from the University of California at Berkeley and a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The search for a successor to Kamin will begin later this year. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, Belgium Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. The European Banking Federation is often referred to as the voice of Europe's banks, and I am here in the hopes that you are the ears of those institutions as well. This year, 2019, is the 10th anniversary of the founding of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which means it has also been 10 years since some of the darker days of the global financial crisis. The FSB was not born on a sunny day; it was born of necessity, with storm clouds still looming. An anniversary—particularly a 10th anniversary—is a good opportunity for reflection. Not far from here, in Antwerp, the artist Peter Paul Rubens painted the "Temple of Janus." Janus was a Roman god who could look both backward and forward in time, and when Rubens painted the work, citizens of Antwerp were at a turning point and were wondering what the future held for them. Today, I would like to take on the role of Janus. I would like to look back on the experiences of the past 10 years, what the FSB has accomplished, and also offer some perspective on just how it contributed to the construction of the post-crisis global financial architecture. As you would expect, I believe the FSB has and will continue to play an important role in our global financial system. I will discuss why that is. I would then like to look ahead to the new challenges facing the global regulatory community, such as innovations in financial technology, shifts in financial globalization and integration, and increasing nonbank financial intermediation. Ten years ago, after the events of the fall of 2008, the G20 nations recognized that the response to the crisis had to be urgent, it had to be credible, and it had to be global. The regulatory community knew it must work to regain the confidence of financial institutions, market participants, and the broader public. They knew that then-existing arrangements for international cooperation were not up to that task. The Financial Stability Forum (FSF), the predecessor of the FSB, had been founded by the G7 countries in 1999 after a series of financial crises in the latter part of the 1990s. The group was intended to enhance cooperation among various national and international supervisory bodies and multilateral financial institutions in order to promote stability in the international financial system. Membership was relatively narrow, with only 12 countries and few emerging markets represented. While the group discussed matters related to financial stability, the areas it was asked to study were relatively narrow, and combined with its limited membership, it had relatively little scope to promote regulatory reform. The looseness of this arrangement represented the prevailing view in advanced nations at the time that national regulators and finance ministries were capable of monitoring and dealing with risks to global financial stability. On the one hand, these nations had long recognized that effective capital regulation of banks with a global footprint was only possible with coordination on minimal capital standards—the Basel Committee process. But there was no such consensus about financial stability, perhaps rooted in a belief, rarely expressed but widespread, that a severe global financial crisis was highly unlikely, and that traditional prudential supervision would be enough to prevent it. Major banks in Europe, Japan, and the United States had been affected by debt crises in developing countries in the 1980s and 1990s, but these crises had never seriously threatened advanced economies. In the fall of 2008, G20 leaders recognized that the severity of the emerging global financial crisis required a response that was beyond the capabilities of the FSF. Like that Long Island police chief in the movie "Jaws," ministers and leaders saw what was racing toward them and decided that they were going to need a bigger boat. Specifically, they recognized there was a major deficiency in the FSF that prevented it from being very effective in establishing international financial regulatory standards. The FSF was narrow—geographically, in the number of governments, and substantively, in the range of ministries, central banks, and important regulatory agencies that were not members. Some of the world's largest economies and financial markets were not represented, in particular emerging markets like China, India, Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa. As of 2009, only 58 percent of global gross domestic product (GDP) was represented, compared to 83 percent of GDP under the FSB today. The issue of representation was crucial, because the financial crisis required a fully global response. As a result, in April of 2009 at the G20 summit in London, the heads of state and government called for an organization "with a stronger institutional basis and enhanced capacity" that would allow them to achieve "much greater consistency and systematic cooperation between countries…that a global financial system requires." Behind those simple words was a sea change in the willingness of advanced nations to tackle significant coordination on financial regulation. The crisis that had been raging at that point for over a year made the need for such a commitment inescapable. With the creation of the FSB, the G20 designed a new regulatory organization with global reach dedicated to advancing and coordinating a newly embraced priority for the global economy—far-reaching reform of financial regulation and supervision. The FSB membership spans central banks, ministries of finance, supervisors of financial institutions, international financial organizations, and market regulators. It has a broad mandate centered on financial stability and coordination of responses for those most challenging issues that cut across the traditional mandates of other global standard-setting bodies. In addition, one of the FSB's chief responsibilities is scanning the horizon for financial vulnerabilities, making it an inherently forward-looking body. The exigency of the crisis helped overcome longstanding deficiencies in the structure of the FSF, rooted in differences between the members or ambivalence about international standard setting itself, related to financial stability. The crisis helped bridge differences and reach consensus, so that quick initial progress was made on matters that required urgent action. In addition to those actions, the members also recognized that work must begin immediately to develop new regulatory standards for capital and liquidity, derivatives reform, and issues stemming from the nonbanking sector which would require some time for data gathering and extensive public consultation. Creation of the FSB was one of a number of steps taken at the international level in the spring of 2009 that over the subsequent months helped restore confidence in the banking system and begin the process of recovery. Since the FSB was born with the global economy and financial markets still in turmoil, immediate attention was needed in a number of core areas: over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, prudential bank standards, resolution, and nonbank finance. Much of the FSB's first 10 years has been focused on these issues, and a great deal has been accomplished, resulting in a significantly strengthened and more resilient global financial system. So let me quickly review our work in these areas. Over-the-Counter DerivativesThe elements of the FSB's agenda for OTC derivatives fall into four categories: 1) central clearing of standardized OTC derivatives, where appropriate, 2) exchange or electronic platform trading of standardized OTC derivatives, 3) reporting to trade repositories, and 4) higher capital and margin requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives. The most recent report on implementation progress finds that in the jurisdictions with the largest OTC derivatives markets, there is almost complete implementation of the necessary reforms. That means that today, OTC derivatives markets, which are crucial for the functioning of our financial system, are simpler, more transparent, and generally more resilient. Prudential Bank StandardsThe FSB has endorsed the work of the Basel Committee that is aimed at enhanced prudential standards for internationally active banking organizations, a process known as Basel III. The main elements of Basel III are: a stronger risk-based capital adequacy framework; a leverage ratio requirement; a capital surcharge for global systemically important banks; a liquidity coverage ratio liquidity requirement; a net stable funding ratio liquidity requirement; and a large exposures framework. All 24 member jurisdictions of the FSB have the core elements of Basel III risk-based capital and liquidity measures in place. However, there has been uneven progress on some of the other elements. Some jurisdictions have not yet fully implemented the large exposures framework, the leverage ratio, and the net stable funding ratio. And most jurisdictions are just starting to implement the Basel III "end game" reforms agreed in December 2017. We have some work left to do but I am confident that it will be completed, and the FSB will continue to push all of its members for full completion of these important measures. ResolutionOne of the most important issues the world faced during the financial crisis was the "too-big-to-fail" dilemma. The large and unpopular bailouts that were deployed to help stem the crisis made it clear that an alternative was needed to deal with "too big to fail." In response, the FSB established the "Key Attributes for Effective Resolution," which identify the responsibilities, instruments, and powers that national resolution regimes should follow if they have to resolve a failing systemically important financial institution or SIFI. The FSB's resolution work also included a new total loss absorbing capacity requirement to help ensure that authorities are able to conduct a bail-in recapitalization of a failed SIFI. Too big to fail was a defining issue of the crisis, and recognizing the importance of the work that has been done to end it, this year the FSB kicked off an evaluation of the effects of the reforms that have been put in place around the world to deal with the issue. By next year, I hope we will be able to discuss the results of that work. Nonbank Financial IntermediationDuring the crisis, "shadow banking" became the term for any type of financial activity that occurred outside banks that resembled what banks did and that often wasn't completely understood. Within the FSB, we refer to those activities as nonbank financial intermediation, or NBFI. Regardless of its name, a lot of blame for the problems that arose in the global financial crisis centered on risks that emerged from some activities in parts of this sector, and one of the FSB's first jobs was to try to look into these activities to better understand their growing role in financial markets. Among the important steps we took was a global monitoring exercise that results in an annual report on the size of NBFI in the global economy. That work actually goes beyond the membership of the FSB, since a number of important international financial centers also report information to us. With all of that information, we are able to track the overall size of nonbank financial intermediation, which in 2017 grew to $184 trillion, representing nearly half of financial activity in 21 countries plus the euro area. More important, we are now able to more carefully categorize activities in the nonbank sector in order to analyze potential vulnerabilities. In addition to monitoring, we have made a number of other recommendations and are working with fellow global standard setters to implement them. For example, we are working with the International Association of Insurance Supervisors on capital standards for global insurers, and we are working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) on liquidity and leverage in the funds industry. The funds sector continues to evolve, so we will focus particular attention here as we move forward. Status of Post-Crisis ReformThe result of 10 years of policy development by the FSB and implementation at the national level has been a stronger, more resilient global financial system. Large banks are better capitalized, less levered, and more liquid. Too-big-to-fail reforms are well-advanced, particularly with the formation of effective resolution regimes for banks. OTC derivatives markets are simpler and more transparent. Nonbank financial intermediation risks are better understood, and steps are being taken to reduce and contain them. While shocks to the system, especially from unanticipated directions, can never be ruled out, these reforms go a long way to reducing the likelihood and severity of future crises. Consequently, the FSB has started to pivot from policy development to evaluating the effectiveness of the reforms it has advocated. I just mentioned that this year the FSB began a two-year evaluation of its too-big-to-fail reform package. We are also completing an evaluation of the effects that reforms have had on infrastructure finance and lending to small- and medium-sized enterprises. Going forward, these evaluations will be critical for assessing where more work needs to be done. Casting my gaze backward, there is much to be proud of in the last decade, success that is reflected in the strength and stability of the global financial system. So now I would like to leave the past behind and turn to the future. But while Janus was the god of beginnings, he was also the god of endings, and as such was able to look both backwards and forwards at the same time. Assessing financial vulnerabilities is a critical part of the FSB mandate, and that is inherently a forward-looking job. The global financial system is constantly evolving, influenced in part by past experience, and by regulation. As I look ahead, I think we must consider whether the ways in which we responded to the financial crisis may not be the most appropriate ones to address the challenges and ongoing changes in the financial system that we currently face. This year the FSB has embarked on an important project to review and update its financial stability surveillance framework. While much of the attention of the FSB in its early years was on post-crisis reforms, members also spent time thinking about new vulnerabilities to the system. As we reach our 10th anniversary, it is a good time to review the ways we monitor the ever-changing financial system. The aim of this review is to ensure that we have a framework that is comprehensive, consistent over time, and effective at identifying relevant vulnerabilities. If we are not at the cutting edge in our ability to assess the state of the financial system, we do a disservice to the public we serve, which relies on a smoothly functioning financial system. In addition, we are looking at how we communicate our understanding of the state of the financial system to the G20 and to the world. We want to be more open about our assessment, but great care has to be taken to avoid a situation where revelations about emerging concerns lead to acceleration of those concerns and becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. As I look forward and ponder the forces that are shaping the evolution of the global financial system, the FSB is currently grappling with two issues—financial innovation and market fragmentation—that have the potential to profoundly affect financial stability, so let me start there. Owing to our forward-looking orientation, the FSB has been actively engaged in monitoring financial innovation for some time. Starting a little over five years ago, there was an explosion of financial innovation that had a technological component, which we now call fintech. This encompasses peer-to-peer lending, cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, and the use of new techniques like artificial intelligence and machine learning. In 2017, the FSB issued a report on the implications of fintech for financial stability. The report was careful to note the potential benefits of many of these innovations, including the possibility of greater financial inclusion and increased speed of financial transactions. However, the report also drew attention to several supervisory and regulatory issues, including three priorities where international collaboration is critical: managing operational risk from third-party service providers, mitigating cyber risks, and monitoring macrofinancial risks that could emerge as fintech activities increase.1 More recently, one particular area of fintech has received a lot of attention—stablecoins. These are a type of crypto-asset that attempts to address the volatility of some crypto-assets by tying their value to conventional assets, such as the value of the U.S. dollar or a basket of currencies. While it hasn't been created yet, it is Facebook's proposal for a new stablecoin that significantly increased the public's attention to stablecoins. At the FSB, we undertake regular monitoring of the financial stability implications of crypto-assets, and we have had discussions about the regulatory and supervisory approaches to crypto-assets and potential gaps in regulation. The introduction of stablecoins, however, brings a potentially new scale and scope that the financial regulatory community must carefully consider. Although there is a small risk to financial stability today, there is no doubt the potential scale of stablecoins and other crypto-assets yet to emerge may pose regulatory challenges. At present, the G7 is finishing a preliminary assessment of stablecoins, and the G20 has asked the FSB to lead the work going forward, which we are actively undertaking. This is an issue that can potentially affect every country in the world. We have already begun work to identify which regulations exist that apply to stablecoins in our jurisdictions, and once that assessment is complete, we will report to the G20 on any appropriate actions that need to be taken to ensure that financial stability is not negatively affected by their introduction. The FSB is grappling with other challenges beyond fintech. As time has passed since the financial crisis, there is concern about fragmentation of financial markets—a sense that globalization of financial markets may be slowing and differences in the regulatory requirements at the national level may be on the rise. Some forms of market fragmentation may have financial stability benefits, such as reasonable loss absorbency requirements imposed on subsidiaries of global banks, but market fragmentation may also bring about unintended negative consequences, such as increased opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and cumulatively higher regulatory burdens for firms. Over the past year, at the request of the G20, the FSB has been examining the different forms in which market fragmentation is manifest. Following up on that, we recently held a workshop where FSB members met with representatives from the private sector and from academia to discuss the internal allocation of capital and liquidity by global financial institutions.2We are also following up in other areas, such as working with IOSCO on issues related to deference and examining improved ways for regulatory and supervisory information sharing. Market fragmentation is an issue that will never disappear, and we will remain vigilant to ensure that it does not pose a threat to financial stability. At the outset today, I said I was going to take the mantle of Janus, who could look backward and forward in time. Janus was also the god of transitions, which makes him doubly appropriate for the FSB at this time, because we find ourselves in transition from a time when we were largely focused on addressing the effects and the lessons of the financial crisis. We now find ourselves with increasingly focused energy on looking forward, with both a strong organization that has been tested through an intense period of policy formulation and implementation and a strong global financial system resulting from those efforts. I hope that 10 years from now, a successor of mine as FSB Chair can point to 10 more years of success in flexibly and adeptly responding to all that the global financial system throws at us. Speaking on behalf of the members of the FSB, we stand ready. 1. Consumer protection is a major concern in relation to fintech and cyber risk, but it is outside the FSB's mandate and is being handled by member governments.Return to text 2. Randal K. Quarles, "Government of Union: Achieving Certainty in Cross-Border Finance" (speech at the Financial Stability Board Workshop, Philadelphia, PA, September 26, 2019).Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Late Cycle Investing: Opportunity and Risk" Fixed-Income Management 2019, a conference sponsored by the CFA Institute and the CFA Society of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this CFA Institute conference on fixed-income management. Before we begin our conversation, I would like to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy.1 The U.S. economy is in a good place, and the baseline outlook is favorable. The median expectation from Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' most recent Summary of Economic Projections is for GDP growth to be around 2 percent in 2019, for growth to continue near this pace next year, and for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation to rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.2The unemployment rate, at 3.5 percent, is at a half-century low, and wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. There is no evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation. But despite this favorable baseline outlook, the U.S. economy confronts some evident risks in this the 11th year of economic expansion. Business fixed investment has slowed notably since last year, exports are contracting on a year-over-year basis, and indicators of manufacturing activity are weakening. Global growth estimates continue to be marked down, and global disinflationary pressures cloud the outlook for U.S. inflation. U.S. inflation remains muted. Over the 12 months through August, PCE inflation is running at 1.4 percent, and core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is running at 1.8 percent. Turning now to monetary policy, at both its July and September meetings, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.3With these decisions, the current target range for the federal funds rate is 1.75 to 2 percent, which compares with the range of 2.25 to 2.5 percent that prevailed between December 2018 and July 2019. The Committee took these actions to provide a somewhat more accommodative policy in response to muted inflation pressures and the risks to the outlook I mentioned earlier. Looking ahead, monetary policy is not on a preset course, and the Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis to assess the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, and it will act as appropriate to sustain growth, a strong labor market, and a return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent objective. Turning now to the framework under which the Federal Reserve operates in financial markets, in September of this year, shocks in the repurchase agreement (repo) market put upward pressure on money market rates, and these pressures spilled over into the federal funds market. In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve on September 17 initiated a program of repurchase operations to provide liquidity sufficient to keep the federal funds rate within the desired target range. These operations have been successful in achieving this goal. As the FOMC announced in January 2019, the Committee seeks to operate with a level of bank reserves that is sufficiently ample to ensure that control of the federal funds rate is achieved primarily by the setting of our administered rates and is not, over the longer term, reliant on frequent and large open market operations.4In July, the FOMC concluded the program of balance sheet reduction in place since October 2017 and indicated then that, after a time, it would commence increasing its securities holdings to maintain reserves at a level consistent with an ample-reserves regime. The FOMC announced on October 11 that it would seek to maintain, over time, a level of bank reserves at or somewhat above the level that prevailed in early September, a level that we believe is sufficient to operate an ample-reserves regime.5This week, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York began a program of purchasing Treasury bills in the secondary market. This program will continue at least into the second quarter of next year and is designed to achieve—and, over time, maintain—ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September. In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to conduct term and overnight repo operations at least through January to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of temporary, but pronounced, increases in our nonreserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk that money market pressures adversely affect monetary policy implementation. It is important to note that the open market operations we have announced are technical, "Central Banking 101" operations and should not be conflated with the large-scale asset purchase programs that the Federal Reserve deployed after the financial crisis. In those programs, the Federal Reserve was seeking to ease financial conditions by lowering term premiums via its purchases of long-term Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities. By contrast, the program announced on October 11 will concentrate its purchases in Treasury bills. The technical measures we are undertaking do not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy, which we continue to implement by adjusting the target range for the federal funds rate. Finally, I would like to say a few words about the monetary policy framework review we are undertaking this year. This review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve. Public engagement, unprecedented in scope for the Fed, is an important part of this effort. Through ourFed Listensevents, we have been hearing a diverse range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from representatives of consumer, labor, business, community, and other groups. We will draw on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible. In July, we began discussing issues associated with the review at our FOMC meetings. We will continue reporting on our discussions in the meeting minutes and share our conclusions when we finish the review during the first half of next year.6 Thank you very much for your attention. 1.These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2.The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the September 2019 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 2019," press release, October 9.Return to text 3.See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, July 31; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 18.Return to text 4.See theStatement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website.Return to text 5.See theStatement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website.Return to text 6.Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board'swebsite.Return to text