WASHINGTON—The federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule that will adopt without change the agencies' interim final rule issued in August 2018, amending their liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) rules to treat certain municipal obligations as high-quality liquid assets (HQLA). The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act requires the agencies to treat a municipal obligation as HQLA under the LCR rule if that obligation is "liquid and readily-marketable" and "investment grade." The final rule will be effective 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that they will use to determine compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios replace the prior year's ratios, which were released on June 15, 2018.In general, section 109 prohibits a bank from establishing or acquiring a branch or branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Section 109 also prohibits branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production.Section 109 provides a process to test compliance with the statutory requirements. The first step in the process involves a loan-to-deposit ratio test that compares a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio to the host state loan-to-deposit ratio for banks in a particular state.A second step is conducted if a bank's statewide loan-to-deposit ratio is less than one-half of the published ratio for that state or if data are not available at the bank to conduct the first step. The second step requires the appropriate agency to determine whether the bank is reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of the communities served by the bank's interstate branches.A bank that fails both steps is in violation of section 109 and is subject to sanctions by the appropriate agency.The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Mapping the Financial Frontier: What Does the Next Decade Hold?” 24th Annual Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Amelia Island, Florida It is a pleasure to be here at this important annual event sponsored and organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Center for Financial Innovation and Stability. The risks in our financial system are constantly evolving. Fifteen years ago, everyone was talking about whether households were borrowing too much. Today everyone is talking about whether businesses are borrowing too much. This evening, I will focus on the implications of the increase in business debt over the past decade and review the steps the Federal Reserve and other agencies are taking to understand and limit the associated risks. In public discussion of this issue, views seem to range from "This is a rerun of the subprime mortgage crisis" to "Nothing to worry about here." At the moment, the truth is likely somewhere in the middle. To preview my conclusions, as of now, business debt does not present the kind of elevated risks to the stability of the financial system that would lead to broad harm to households and businesses should conditions deteriorate. At the same time, the level of debt certainly could stress borrowers if the economy weakens. The Federal Reserve continues to assess the potential amplification of such stresses on borrowers to the broader economy through possible vulnerabilities in the financial system, and I currently see such risks as moderate. DiscussionMany commentators have observed with a sense of déjà vu the buildup of risky business debt over the past few years. The acronyms have changed a bit—"CLOs" (collateralized loan obligations) instead of "CDOs" (collateralized debt obligations), for example—but once again, we see a category of debt that is growing faster than the income of the borrowers even as lenders loosen underwriting standards. Likewise, much of the borrowing is financed opaquely, outside the banking system. Many are asking whether these developments pose a new threat to financial stability. At the Federal Reserve, we take this possibility seriously. The Fed and other regulators are using our supervisory tools and closely monitoring risks from the buildup of risky business debt. Business debt has clearly reached a level that should give businesses and investors reason to pause and reflect. If financial and economic conditions were to deteriorate, overly indebted firms could well face severe strains. However, the parallels to the mortgage boom that led to the Global Financial Crisis are not fully convincing. Most importantly, the financial system today appears strong enough to handle potential business-sector losses, which was manifestly not the case a decade ago with subprime mortgages. And there are other differences: Increases in business borrowing are not outsized for such a long expansion, in contrast to the mortgage boom; business credit is not fueled by a dramatic asset price bubble, as mortgage debt was; and CLO structures are much sounder than the structures that were in use during the mortgage credit bubble. Could the increase in business debt pose greater risks to the financial system than currently appreciated? My colleagues and I continually ask ourselves that question. We are also taking multiple steps to better understand and address the potential risks. In conjunction with other U.S. regulatory agencies, both domestically through the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and internationally through the Financial Stability Board (FSB), we are monitoring developments, assessing unknowns, and working to develop a clearer picture. We are also using our supervisory tools to hold the banks we supervise to strong risk-management standards. And we are using our stress tests to ensure banks' resilience even in severely adverse business conditions. The Rise of Business LeverageLet's start with the basic facts. Many measures confirm that the business sector has significantly increased its borrowing as the economy has expanded over the past decade. Business debt relative to the size of the economy is at historic highs. Corporate debt relative to the book value of assets is at the upper end of its range over the past few decades (figure 1). And investment-grade corporate debt has shifted closer to the edge of speculative grade. At the moment, the business sector is quite healthy overall. Business income is strong, reflecting healthy profit margins. And because interest rates are quite low by historical standards, the costs of servicing today's higher levels of debt remain low relative to business income (figure 2). Despite crosscurrents, the economy is showing continued growth, strong job creation, and rising wages, all in a context of muted inflation pressures. But if a downturn were to arrive unexpectedly, some firms would face challenges. Not only is the volume of debt high, but recent growth has also been concentrated in the riskier forms of debt. Among investment-grade bonds, a near-record fraction is at the lowest rating—a phenomenon known as the "triple-B cliff." In a downturn, some of these borrowers could be downgraded into high-yield territory, which would require some investors to sell their holdings, thereby confronting traditional high-yield investors with a sudden influx of bonds. There have also been sizable shifts within the non-investment-grade, or riskier, debt universe. Higher-risk businesses have traditionally funded themselves with a mix of high-yield bonds and leveraged loans. Over time, the balance between the two has swung back and forth because of investor demand, the interest rate environment, and other factors. In the past few years, leveraged loans have grown far more quickly (figure 3). In fact, while net new issuance of high-yield bonds in 2018 was close to nil, leveraged loans outstanding rose 20 percent and now stand at more than $1 trillion. So far this year, issuance of high-yield bonds and leveraged loans has been more balanced. In addition, underwriting standards have weakened. With leveraged loans, covenants intended to protect lenders may be an endangered species; more loans now feature high debt-to-earnings ratios; and the use of optimistic projections including "earnings add-backs" is becoming more common. The rise in riskier business borrowing has been funded principally by nonbank lenders. Collateralized loan obligations are now the largest lenders, with about 62 percent of outstanding leveraged loans (figure 4). These lenders are actively managed securitization vehicles that mostly buy higher-risk assets like leveraged loans. CLOs, in turn, are funded by a slice of equity and layers of debt of varying seniority. After CLOs, mutual funds are the next-largest vehicle for holding leveraged loans, with about 20 percent of the market. These funds allow investors to redeem their shares daily, although the underlying loans take longer to sell. As a result, investors may react to financial stress by trying to redeem their shares before the funds have sold their most liquid assets. Widespread redemptions by investors, in turn, could lead to widespread price pressures, which could affect all holders of loans, including CLOs and those that hold CLOs. Risks to Financial Stability: Using the Framework Deployed since the CrisisAs you can see, there are similarities to the subprime mortgage crisis. As with the mortgage boom, the business debt story begins with rapid growth of debt to new highs and a surge in lending to risky borrowers made possible by aggressive underwriting using securitization vehicles. But there are also important differences. One difference is that financial authorities now closely monitor financial stability vulnerabilities on an ongoing basis, armed with lessons learned from the crisis. The Board of Governors meets at least four times a year to assess threats to the financial system and is constantly monitoring developments. We use a checklist of potential financial vulnerabilities that we have described elsewhere, most recently in theFinancial Stability Reportwe published earlier this month.1This approach gives us a way to organize and weigh the mass of facts, anecdotes, and speculation we confront as we monitor financial stability. In assessing financial stability risks, we constantly consult our four-point checklist: borrowing by businesses and households, valuation pressures, leverage in the financial system, and funding risk. If households or businesses have borrowed too much, they will be forced to cut back spending and investing or even default if their incomes fall or the value of the collateral backing their loans declines. Valuation pressures give us a sense of overall risk appetite and, should investors lose that appetite, how far prices could fall. If lenders face defaulting borrowers and have too little loss-absorbing capacity, they risk insolvency. At best, they will cut back on lending to other borrowers, dragging the economy down. At worst, they will fail, which can lead to severe economic damage to households and businesses. Finally, when the financial system funds long-maturity assets with short-maturity liabilities, we risk a classic "fast burn" crisis—a bank run, or its equivalent involving investors and institutions outside traditional banking.2 In our framework, the story of the mid-2000s goes something like this: Amid a self-reinforcing cycle of house price gains and mortgage credit expansion, households borrowed (and lenders lent) far too much, and property prices rose far too high. Financial institutions of all shapes and sizes also borrowed too much. And the financial sector was highly susceptible to a run because it funded risky, long-maturity mortgages with extended chains of fragile and opaque financing structures that ultimately rested on short-maturity liabilities. Let's compare this story with the current situation using our four-point checklist, beginning with borrowing by businesses and households. Business debt has grown faster than gross domestic product (GDP) for several years and today is high. But the growth in the ratio of business debt to GDP in the past decade is much less than the growth in household debt to GDP that we saw in the run-up to the Global Financial Crisis. Back then, household debt grew from 60 percent of GDP to 90 percent, or by half (figure 5). At its recent low, business debt was 65 percent of GDP. Now, even after rapid growth, it is still below 75 percent of GDP. Overall, the increase in business debt relative to the size of the economy is one-third the increase in household debt seen in the previous decade. Business debt rises in expansions. It is a steady upward plod in borrowing over the long expansion—not a rapid expansion—that has now brought business debt to GDP back to historic highs. Seen this way, the current situation looks typical of business cycles. The mortgage credit boom was, because of its magnitude and speed, far outside historical norms.3 As for household debt, we see that household debt-to-income ratios have steadily declined post-crisis. Moreover, a high and rising fraction of this debt is rated prime. All told, household debt burdens appear much more manageable. Our second factor—valuation pressures—also points to moderate risks to financial stability. Valuations are high across several financial markets. Equity prices have recently reached new highs, and corporate bond and loan spreads are narrow. Both commercial and residential property prices have moved above their long-run relationship with rents, although price gains slowed substantially last year. All of these developments point to strong risk appetite—as might be expected given the strong economy. But there does not appear to be a feedback loop between borrowing and asset prices, as was the case in the run-up to the financial crisis. While borrowing by businesses has been strong, it is not fueling excessive prices or investment in a critical sector such as housing, whose collapse would undermine collateral values and lead to outsized losses. Instead, the increase in business borrowing has been broad based across sectors, including technology, oil and gas production, and manufacturing. Regarding the third factor—leverage in the financial system—today banks at the core of the financial system are fundamentally stronger and more resilient. Our post-crisis regulatory framework is based on robust capital requirements backed by strong stress tests, resulting in much higher levels of capital in the banking system (figure 6). These stress tests are a way to estimate the direct and indirect effects of extremely bad macroeconomic and financial developments on our banking system. We publish the scenarios that describe the macro and financial developments every year by mid-February and release the test results in June. In the pre-crisis environment, supervisors focused more on the most likely outcomes, not on these tail risks. Since we began routine stress-testing in 2011, the scenarios we use have featured severe global recessions characterized by major stress in the corporate sector, where large numbers of firms default on their loans and bonds. As actual economic conditions have improved, the scenarios have gotten tougher. The most recent stress tests indicate that, even after the losses from the scenario, capital levels at the largest banks would remain above the levels those banks had before the crisis. Loss-absorbing capacity elsewhere in the financial system is also much improved. Leverage at broker-dealers is far below levels before the crisis and remains low relative to the norms of the past several decades. Insurers also appear well capitalized. As for our fourth factor—funding risk—the susceptibility of the financial system to runs also appears low. In part because of the post-crisis regulatory regime, large banks hold substantial amounts of highly liquid assets and rely relatively little on short-term wholesale funding (figure 7). Money market funds hold much safer assets. And CLOs, which have facilitated the growth of leveraged loans, have stable funding: Investors commit funds for lengthy periods, so they cannot, through withdrawals, force CLOs to sell assets at distressed prices. Addressing the Risks: Monitoring and ActingOverall, vulnerabilities to financial stability from business debt and other factors do not appear elevated. We take the risks from business debt seriously but think that the financial system appears strong enough to handle potential losses. We also know that our dynamic financial system does not stand still. We can always learn more about financial markets, and we will always act to address emerging risks. Together with our domestic and international counterparts, we are monitoring developments in business debt markets, working to develop and share data on how these markets operate, studying ways to further strengthen the system, and working to ensure that banks are properly managing the business debt risks they have taken on. Through the FSOC, the banking and market regulators coordinate our monitoring of financial conditions. In recent meetings, the FSOC has discussed leveraged lending in depth. We recognize that each regulator directly sees only a part of the larger picture, and we are working to stitch these parts together so we can collectively see that larger picture and the risks it holds. For example, the Securities and Exchange Commission is examining the potential for liquidity strains at mutual funds, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission is working to understand the use of derivatives to hedge risks associated with leveraged loans. What else are we watching for? Business debt growth has moderated somewhat since early 2018, but this might be just a pause. Another sharp increase in debt, unless supported by strong fundamentals, could increase vulnerabilities appreciably. Businesses, investors, and lenders need to focus on these vulnerabilities—as will the Federal Reserve. In addition, regulators, investors, and market participants around the world would benefit greatly from more information on who is bearing the ultimate risk associated with CLOs. We know that the U.S. CLO market spans the globe, involving foreign banks and asset managers. But right now, we mainly know where the CLOs are not—only $90 billion of the roughly $700 billion in total CLOs are held by the largest U.S. banks. That is certainly good news for domestic banks, but in a downturn institutions anywhere could find themselves under pressure, especially those with inadequate loss-absorbing capacity or runnable short-term financing. The Federal Reserve is participating in international efforts, under the auspices of the FSB, to improve our knowledge of these key issues. Through the FSB, we are focused on determining the size of the global leveraged loan market and the holders of the loans as an important step toward a better understanding of the underlying risks. Beyond monitoring markets and collecting new data, several supervisory efforts are also under way. To complement the quantitative analysis in our stress tests, our supervisors have been qualitatively assessing how well banks are managing the risks associated with leveraged lending. Through the Shared National Credit Program, which evaluates large syndicated loans, our supervisors are continuing to work with their counterparts at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to ensure that banks are properly managing the risks of losses they face from participating in the leveraged lending market. ConclusionLet me wrap up with three thoughts. First, business debt is near record levels, and recent issuance has been concentrated in the riskiest segments. As a result, some businesses may come under severe financial strain if the economy deteriorates. A highly leveraged business sector could amplify any economic downturn as companies are forced to lay off workers and cut back on investments. Investors, financial institutions, and regulators need to focus on this risk today, while times are good. Second, today business debt does not appear to present notable risks to financial stability. The debt-to-GDP ratio has moved up at a steady pace, in line with previous expansions and neither fueled by nor fueling an asset bubble. Moreover, banks and other financial institutions have sizable loss-absorbing buffers. The growth in business debt does not rely on short-term funding, and overall funding risk in the financial system is moderate. Third, we cannot be satisfied with our current level of knowledge about these markets, particularly the vulnerability of financial institutions to potential losses and the possible strains on market liquidity and prices should investors exit investment vehicles holding leveraged loans. We are committed to better understanding the areas where our information is incomplete. This commitment includes coordination with other domestic and international agencies to understand who is participating in business lending and how their behavior could potentially amplify stress events. ReferencesAdrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2015). "Financial Stability Monitoring,"Annual Review of Financial Economics, vol. 7 (December), pp. 357–95. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010).An Assessment of the Long-Term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements(PDF). Basel, Switzerland: BCBS, August. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019).Financial Stability Report(PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, May. Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe (2002)."Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus," (PDF). BIS Working Papers 114. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, July. Dokko, Jane, Brian M. Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander Van Den Heuvel (2011). "Monetary Policy and the Global Housing Bubble,"Economic Policy, vol. 26 (April), pp. 233–83. Firestone, Simon, Amy Lorenc, and Ben Ranish (2017)."An Empirical Economic Assessment of the Costs and Benefits of Bank Capital in the US," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-034. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2016). "The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises and Business Cycles,"Economic Policy, vol. 31 (January), pp. 107–52. Kiley, Michael T. (2018)."What Macroeconomic Conditions Lead Financial Crises?" (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-038. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010).Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements(final report) (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December. Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor (2012). "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008,"American Economic Review, vol. 102 (April), pp. 1029–61. 1. See Board of Governors (2019).Return to text 2. The Board'sFinancial Stability Reportdiscusses the analytical framework. For a longer and more academic discussion, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2015). For research on the role of credit, house prices, and other factors as indicators for potential financial instability, see Borio and Lowe (2002); Schularick and Taylor (2012); Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2016); and Kiley (2018). For research on the role of bank capital, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010); Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010); and Firestone, Lorenc, and Ranish (2017).Return to text 3. For an analysis of the degree to which housing market developments in the 2000s appeared unrelated to economic fundamentals and references to related research, see Dokko and others (2011).Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Richmond Community Listening Session, Richmond, Virginia It is good to be here in Richmond today.1I appreciate my colleague, Tom Barkin, leading this event, and it is a pleasure to also be withSherrie Brach Armstrong, CEO of the Community Foundation for a greater Richmond; Tim Davey, Timmons Group economic development manager;Shawn Smith, director of workforce development at Goodwill of Central and Coastal Virginia; andRobert Ukrop, chairman and CEO of Ukrop's Homestyle Foods. Today's community listening session is part of a series called "Fed Listens." The Federal Reserve is undertaking a review to make sure we are carrying out the monetary policy goals assigned to us by the Congress in the most effective way we can.2In conducting this review, we are reaching out to communities around the country in sessions like this to understand how you are experiencing the economy day to day. Two GoalsSo what are the monetary policy goals the Congress assigned us? Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability. These two goals are what we refer to as our dual mandate. By price stability we mean moderate and stable inflation. Specifically, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the group at the Fed responsible for determining monetary policy—has announced that our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent over time. The maximum employment part of our dual mandate is straightforward: The Congress has directed us to achieve the highest level of employment—and thus the lowest level of unemployment—that is consistent with price stability. While the Congress has specified the goals for monetary policy and a set of tools or authorities to pursue them, it has allowed the FOMC to determine how to best go about achieving those goals. Reviewing How We Conduct Monetary PolicyLast year, core inflation was very close to our goal. And the unemployment rate is at a 50-year low. We are undertaking our review to ensure we are well positioned to meet our goals for many years to come. We also want to make sure that the way we are setting monetary policy is keeping up with the way the economy is changing, which I have been referring to as the "new normal."3There are a few key features of that new normal. For example, interest rates have stayed very low in recent years not only in the United States, but also in many other advanced economies. For a variety of reasons, it seems likely that equilibrium interest rates will remain low in the future. Low interest rates present a challenge for the traditional ways of conducting monetary policy. That is especially true in recessions when, in the past, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates by 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household spending and business investment. But when equilibrium interest rates are low, we have less room to cut interest rates and thus less room to buffer the economy using our conventional tool. For example, following the most recent recession in 2008 and 2009, we kept interest rates as low as the Committee thought they could go, which was close to zero, for many years. Another big change in the economy is that inflation doesn't move as much with economic activity and employment as it has in the past. This is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat. In many ways, the flatter Phillips curve has advantages: It means that the labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers that may have been sidelined back into productive employment without an acceleration in inflation, unlike what we saw in the 1960s and 1970s. Similarly, inflation doesn't fall as much in recessions. But there is an important risk with today's low sensitivity of inflation to slack: It makes it more difficult to boost inflation to our objective of 2 percent on a sustainable basis. And, as we know from other countries, if inflation consistently falls short of the central bank's objective, lower inflation tends to get embedded in people's expectations. Expectations that inflation will remain low in turn can create a self-fulfilling dynamic with actual inflation, making it even more difficult for the central bank to boost inflation. And because inflation is reflected in nominal interest rates, that, in turn, can also reduce the amount of policy space the central bank has available to prevent the economy from slipping into recession. In fact, in recent years, central banks around the world have had to use a larger variety of policy tools than they traditionally used to respond to the financial crisis and support economic expansion. Some Issues to ExploreGiven the new normal of low equilibrium interest rates and low sensitivity of inflation to slack, it is prudent to assess how well various approaches worked both here and around the world, with a view to identifying the best ways to promote the goals the Congress assigned to us. As such, we will be looking widely at our tools and strategies, assessing not just the various approaches that were undertaken, but also approaches that have been proposed but not tried. One of those is the idea that the Federal Reserve should explicitly promise to "make up" for the fact that interest rates can't be cut as much as during past recessions. The Federal Reserve could hold interest rates lower after a recession is over, perhaps by promising not to raise interest rates until inflation or the unemployment rate have reached a particular level. A related idea is average inflation targeting, meaning the Fed would aim to achieve its inflation objective on average over a longer period of time—perhaps over the business cycle. So if inflation fell short during a recession, the Federal Reserve would aim at inflation above target during the recovery and expansion. This approach would also have aspects of a make-up policy, as policy would likely be kept easier—that is, more accommodative—than otherwise during the period where inflation is above target. While such approaches sound quite appealing on their face, they have not yet been implemented in practice. There is some skepticism that a central bank would in fact prove able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that inflation might accelerate and inflation expectations might rise too high. Another idea I would like to hear more about involves targeting the yield on specific securities so that once the short-term interest rates we traditionally target have hit zero, we might turn to targeting slightly longer-term interest rates—initially one-year interest rates, for example, and if more stimulus is needed, perhaps moving out the curve to two-year rates. Under this policy, the Federal Reserve would stand ready to use its balance sheet to hit the targeted interest rate, but unlike the asset purchases that were undertaken in the recent recession, there would be no specific commitments with regard to purchases of Treasury securities. Similar to make-up policies, such an approach could help communicate publicly how long the Federal Reserve is planning to keep rates low. I should emphasize that these are just a few ideas; there may be other good ideas, and part of the process we are engaged in involves looking around for other ideas. Most, if not all, of the ideas have both advantages and disadvantages, and we will have to consider them carefully as our review progresses. Of course, we may find that the preferred approach is modest enhancements to the tools that proved their worth during the crisis. ListeningNow, how does today's event fit into all of this? Just as the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond is sponsoring today's event with representatives of its local community, so too are other Reserve Banks sponsoring similar events. We are making sure to hear from people across the country. We will also hold a national-level conference in Chicago in June. And, in addition to presentations from prominent outside experts, we made sure to add panels to hear from community organizations, training institutions, and other groups that can give us insights on how monetary policy is affecting Main Street. Since I arrived at the Fed, I have put a premium on visiting communities all over the country to get a direct sense of how they are experiencing the economy. In fact, my first such visit was in this District with community development staff from the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Due to the wisdom of the Fed's original architects, the Federal Reserve System derives tremendous value from interacting with communities from all around the country. In 2015, we created a Community Advisory Council at the Federal Reserve Board, where we hear from a broad variety of community groups and others. And many of the regional Federal Reserve Banks have similar councils, including the Richmond Fed's Community Investment Council. In our review this year, we are listening broadly and are seeking perspectives at the community level. So today we want to hear from you. How is your community experiencing today's economy? Is everyone who wants a job able to get one? Can they get the necessary training? Are businesses finding it relatively easy to hire the workers they need? What about inflation and pricing power? And what about the availability and cost of credit—whether it be to start or expand a small business, buy a car to get to work, or invest in owning a home or getting a degree? I look forward to hearing your views on these and other questions. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Janet L. Yellen, "Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications," remarks at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, November 13, 2012. Richard H. Clarida, "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," remarks at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 22, 2019. Jerome H. Powell, "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," remarks at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 8, 2019.Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, "The "New Normal" and What It Means for Monetary Policy," remarks at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, September 12, 2016.Return to text Fed ListensEvents
The Federal Open Market Committee on Friday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2020: January 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 17-18 (Tuesday-Wednesday) April 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 9-10 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 28-29 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 15-16 (Tuesday-Wednesday) November 4-5 (Wednesday-Thursday) December 15-16 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 26-27, 2021 (Tuesday-Wednesday) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
On May 30, 2019, the Federal Reserve conducted a floating-rate offering of term deposits through its Term Deposit Facility. The operation offered seven-day term deposits with the rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. Following are the results of the operation: The awarded deposits will settle on May 30, 2019, and will mature on June 6, 2019. The operation effective rate will apply to all awarded deposits. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday approved final amendments to its regulations to reflect the transfer of the Board's rulemaking authority for the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act (S.A.F.E. Act) to the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Bureau). Entities that were subject to the Board's rules are now subject to the Bureau's rules. The S.A.F.E. Act mandates a nationwide licensing and registration system for residential mortgage loan originators. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act transferred rulemaking authority for the S.A.F.E. Act to the Bureau from the Board, the other federal banking agencies, and the Farm Credit Administration. Because the Bureau has already issued a final rule that is substantially identical to the Board's regulations that incorporate the S.A.F.E. Act, the Board is repealing the applicable provisions of Regulation H (Membership of State Banking Institutions in the Federal Reserve System) and Regulation K (International Banking Operations). The Board's notice is attached. The amendments become effective 30 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Results from the latest supervisory stress tests conducted as part of the Dodd-Frank Act will be released on Friday, June 21, and the results from the related Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) will be released on Thursday, June 27, the Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday. Results for both exercises will be announced at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Stress tests help ensure that banks have adequate capital to absorb losses so that they can lend to households and businesses even in a serious recession. The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests are a forward-looking assessment of capital sufficiency using standard capital action assumptions for the largest domestic and foreign bank holding companies. CCAR evaluates the capital planning and capital adequacy of the same firms, but incorporates their planned capital actions, such as dividend payments and share buybacks and issuances. This year only the largest and most complex banks—generally those with total consolidated assets of $250 billion or more—are subject to stress testing.As previously announced by the Board, less-complex banks will not be subject to the stress test during the 2019 cycle. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First American Bancorp, Greenwood Village, ColoradoWritten Agreement dated August 20, 2010 (PDF)Terminated May 3, 2019 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Fulton Financial Corporation, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and Lafayette Ambassador Bank, Bethlehem, PennsylvaniaCease and Desist Order, dated September 4, 2014 (PDF)Terminated May 20, 2019 United Bank Limited, Karachi, Pakistan and United Bank Limited, New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement, dated July 2, 2018 (PDF)Terminated May 20, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the appointment of Winona H. Varnon as director of its Management Division, effective June 1, 2019. Varnon has been deputy director of the division since April 2017 and succeeds Michell Clark. As division director, Varnon will be responsible for the division's oversight of a broad array of functions including budget and administration, facility and support services, oversight of major capital improvement projects, human resources, law enforcement, continuity of operations and intelligence services, technology services, and internal communications. Varnon came to the Board in 2017 from the National Endowment for the Arts, where she served as deputy chairman for management and budget. During her 33-plus years of federal government service, she has also held positions at the Department of Education, Office of Personnel Management, Transportation Security Administration, Immigration and Naturalization Service, and the Department of Justice. Varnon holds a masters degree in public administration from Harvard University. She earned a law degree at Howard University and a bachelor of science degree in criminal justice at Alabama State University. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested comment on a proposal to reduce risk and increase efficiency in the financial system by applying netting protections to a broader range of financial institutions. The proposal would amend Regulation EE (Financial Institution Netting) to apply netting provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) to certain new entities including swap dealers. The proposal would also make minor clarifications to the existing activities-based test in Regulation EE to clarify how the activities-based test applies following a consolidation of legal entities. Sections 401-407 of FDICIA validate netting contracts among financial institutions. Parties to a netting contract agree that they will pay or receive the net, rather than the gross, payment due under the netting contract. FDICIA provides certainty that netting contracts will be enforced, even in the event of the insolvency of one of the parties. Regulation EE currently includes an activities-based test pursuant to which an entity can qualify as a financial institution for purposes of FDICIA's netting provisions if it is a market intermediary and, during the previous 15-month period, it engaged in financial contracts exceeding specified numerical thresholds. Consistent with FDICIA's goals of reducing systemic risk and increasing efficiency in the financial markets, the Board proposes to expand the definition of financial institution to ensure that certain entities qualify as financial institutions, including swap dealers and security-based swap dealers; major swap participants and major security-based swap participants; nonbank systemically important financial institutions; certain financial market utilities; foreign banks; bridge institutions; and Federal Reserve Banks. The Board also proposes to clarify that, following a consolidation of legal entities, the surviving entity can determine whether its financial contracts exceeded the numerical thresholds in the activities-based test by considering the aggregated financial contracts of the consolidated persons during the previous 15-month period. The Board's notice is attached. Comments are due within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Order of Prohibition against Christopher O'Connell, former employee of Centennial Bank, Lubbock, Texas, for misappropriation of bank funds. Other enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition and Cease-and-Desist Order against Katherine Tibboles, former employee of The Croghan Colonial Bank, Fremont, Ohio, for embezzling bank funds The Board on Tuesday also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Highlands Bankshares, Inc., Abingdon, Virginia; Highlands Union Bank, Abingdon, VirginiaWritten Agreement, dated October 13, 2010 (PDF)Terminated May 16, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent prohibition against Adam D. Koontz, former employee of Fayette County Bank, Saint Elmo, Illinois, for unsafe and unsound lending practices Adams Bank and Trust, Ogallala, NebraskaOrder of assessment of a civil money penalty dated May 15, 2019 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. The Federal Reserve Board's latestReport on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Householdsfound that most measures of economic well-being and financial resilience in 2018 were similar to, or slightly better than, those in 2017. Overall, the financial experiences reported by the 11,000 adults surveyed in 2018 were largely positive, and many families have experienced substantial gains since the survey began in 2013, in line with the nation's ongoing economic expansion. When asked about their overall economic well-being, 75 percent of U.S. adults said they were "doing okay" or "living comfortably"—up 12 percentage points from 2013. The survey also asked how they would pay for a hypothetical unexpected expense of $400. Sixty-one percent said they would pay the expense with cash, savings, or a credit card paid off at the next statement; 27 percent would borrow or sell something; and 12 percent would not be able to cover it. In 2013, only half of adults said they would pay with cash or its equivalent. Despite the improved finances of many adults, the survey continued to detect areas of financial distress as well as persistent differences by race, education level, and, in some cases, geography. Nearly 8 in 10 whites reported doing at least okay financially, compared to two-thirds of blacks and Hispanics. A similar difference exists by education: among those with a bachelor's degree or higher, 87 percent were doing at least okay, compared with 64 percent of those with a high school degree or less. Of those who live in middle- and upper-income neighborhoods, 8 in 10 reported overall satisfaction with their community, compared to 6 in 10 of those living in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The report draws from the Board's sixth annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which was conducted in October and November 2018 and examined the financial lives of U.S. adults and their families. Respondents described their experiences on a wide range of topics including income, employment, dealing with expenses, banking and credit, housing, education, and retirement. The responses were weighted to be nationally representative of adults, aged 18 and over, in the United States. A new topic in this year's report—aimed at understanding the experiences of bank customers—was the ability of adults to access funds in their bank accounts. Thirteen percent of those with a bank account had at least one problem accessing funds in their account in the prior year. Problems with a bank website or mobile app (7 percent) and delays in when funds were available to use (6 percent) were the most common problems cited. Those with volatile income and low savings were more likely to experience these problems. "As this report shows, we continue to see the growing U.S. economy supporting most American families," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Michelle W. Bowman. "At the same time, the survey does find differences across communities, with just over half of those living in rural areas describing their local economy as good or excellent compared to two-thirds of those living in cities. Across the country, many families continue to experience financial distress and struggle to save for retirement and unexpected expenses." The Board's SHED data look at how individuals are managing their finances and making decisions vital to their financial lives and futures. Among the report's other key findings: The report, downloadable data, and a video summarizing the survey's findings may be found at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households(PDF) Supplemental Appendixes to the Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2018(PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey has been used on occasion by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between February 7, 2019, and February 21, 2019, and includes responses from banks that held roughly three quarters of total reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The February 2019 survey is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity rose at a solid rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Growth of household spending and business fixed investment slowed in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have declined and are running below 2 percent. On balance, market-based measures of inflation compensation have remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; Esther L. George; Randal K. Quarles; and Eric S. Rosengren. Implementation Note issued May 1, 2019
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested comment on potential modifications to the Federal Reserve Banks' National Settlement Service (NSS) and Fedwire® Funds Service to support enhancements to the same-day automated clearinghouse (ACH) service. The Board also requested comment on corresponding changes to the Federal Reserve Policy on Payment System Risk related to a new posting time for transactions and an increased daylight overdraft fee. On September 13, 2018, NACHA, the rules and standards body for the ACH network, announced that its voting members had approved amendments to the NACHA Operating Rules & Guidelines to establish a third same-day ACH processing and settlement window. Currently, there is a morning window with a submission deadline of 10:30 a.m. ET and settlement at 1:00 p.m. ET and an afternoon window with a submission deadline of 2:45 p.m. ET and settlement at 5:00 p.m. ET. The new window, with a submission deadline of 4:45 p.m. ET and settlement at 6:00 p.m. ET, would allow originating depository financial institutions to submit same-day items later in the business day. A third same-day ACH window aligns with the Federal Reserve's ongoing objective to support improvements in the safety and efficiency of payment systems in the United States as well as public interest in greater availability of payment services. In particular, the later same-day ACH window would allow more institutions to use same-day ACH services during a greater portion of their business day and may promote greater adoption of same-day ACH and availability of the service to originators and end-users. The NACHA rules changes require adjustments to Federal Reserve services so that the private-sector ACH operator, The Clearing House, can settle same-day ACH transactions later in the day via the NSS. These changes include: Collectively, these proposed changes are intended to allow sufficient time between the closing of NSS and the Fedwire Funds third-party cutoff, and between the Fedwire Funds third-party cutoff and the closing of the Fedwire Funds Service for depository institutions and their customers to reposition balances and manage liquidity. However, these potential modifications to NSS and the Fedwire Funds Service may increase certain risks and costs for Reserve Bank accountholders and their customers, including risks and costs related to compression of end-of-day processing activities, decreased availability of extensions to operating hours, and more frequent delays to the reopening of the Fedwire Funds Service. As such, the Federal Reserve has proposed options to manage any increased risks from the proposed operating hours. The Board requests comment on all aspects of these potential changes, including the Board's analysis of the potential public benefits and the potential options to mitigate the risk of more frequent delays to the reopening of the Fedwire Funds Service. The Board is not at this time directly addressing the comments received on the November 2018 notice regarding potential actions the Federal Reserve could take to support faster payments in the United States. Rather, the notice issued today is narrowly focused on whether the Reserve Banks should modify the operating hours for their wholesale services to support a third same-day ACH processing and settlement window. The Board continues to evaluate, and will separately respond to, comments on the November 2018 notice. A copy of the Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. Comments are requested within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML
The Federal Reserve System's Community Development Research Conference, "Renewing the Promise of the Middle Class," will be held May 9-10, 2019, in Washington, D.C. The conference will feature the latest research on challenges faced by low- and moderate-income families when moving into the middle class, as well as threats to the economic security of middle-class households. Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell will deliver brief welcoming remarks at the conference. Governor Lael Brainard and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Charles Evans will also speak. The conference will close with a keynote address and conversation with Juan Salgado, the chancellor of City Colleges of Chicago. Research from the conference will focus on three key areas: emerging labor market and education trends reshaping pathways to the middle class; financial security and wealth building as key building blocks of a middle class lifestyle; and, the role of local communities in economic mobility and security for the middle class. Research from multiple disciplines will be presented to policymakers and community practitioners. "This year's research zeros in on factors that affect people's ability to move into, and remain in, the middle class," said Eric Belsky, Director of the Division of Consumer and Community Affairs at the Federal Reserve Board. "Our discussions will focus on how the research informs public policy and community development programs that advance economic opportunity and upward mobility." The conference will be co-hosted by the community development offices of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Federal Reserve Board. The agenda and other details are available on the conference website atwww.chicagofed.org/region/community-development/2019-federal-reserve-system-community-development-research-conference. Keynote speeches and plenary sessions will be livestreamed at:www.youtube.com/federalreserve. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve plans to continue its previously announced periodic testing of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) with one operation in May. These operations are aimed at ensuring the operational readiness of the TDF and providing eligible institutions with an opportunity to maintain familiarity with term deposit procedures. The TDF test operations are a matter of prudent planning and have no implications for the near-term conduct of monetary policy. On May 30, 2019, the Federal Reserve will conduct a floating-rate offering of term deposits with an early withdrawal feature through its TDF. The Federal Reserve will offer seven-day term deposits with a rate set equal to the sum of the interest rate paid on excess reserves plus a fixed spread of 1 basis point. The maximum tender amount per institution will be $250,000,000. The operation window will be open from 10:30 a.m. EDT to 12:30 p.m. EDT, and awarded deposits will settle the same day the operation is executed. Description of Operation and Tender Parameters Submission of TenderParticipants must submit tenders by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application (https://www.frbservices.org/sign-in/term-deposit-facility.html) between the opening time and the closing time on the operation date. All tenders that are complete and compliant with the operation parameters listed above will be automatically awarded in full. Early WithdrawalThe penalty for obtaining a return of funds prior to the maturity date includes the forfeiture of all interest on the term deposit plus an additional fee of 0.75000 percent at an annual rate applied to the principal over the entire term of the deposit. Requests for early withdrawal must be made between 10:00 a.m. EDT and 12:00 p.m. EDT. See the TDF Resource Center for additional details regarding this feature and the terms and conditions for early withdrawal (https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html). NotificationParticipants will be able to view their awards by accessing the Term Deposit Facility application. Summary operation results will be published on the Board of Governors' website (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/tdf.htm) at approximately 3:30 p.m. EDT on the notification date. The operation will be conducted as specified in this announcement, Regulation D, and the terms and conditions of the Term Deposit Facility (https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html). Additional information, including the steps that institutions must complete to be eligible to participate in term deposit operations are available athttps://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/reserves-central/term-deposit-facility/index.html. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At "Renewing the Promise of the Middle Class" 2019 Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference, Washington, D.C. It is good to be here at the Federal Reserve System's Community Development Research Conference. This year, our conference is focusing on renewing the promise of the middle class, a topic that goes to the heart of the American dream and underpins the vibrancy of our democracy and society.1 What Does It Mean to Be Part of the Middle Class?Before I dig into the data, I want to touch on what it means to be a part of the middle class, recognizing aspirations differ from person to person. From a purely economic perspective, being middle class commonly means having financial security and the ability to invest for our futures and for our children. In turn, having a strong middle class implies that families with average incomes have the purchasing power to consume and the savings to invest. So a strong middle class is often seen as a cornerstone of a vibrant economy and, beyond that, a resilient democracy.2 In recent years, households at the middle of the income distribution have faced a number of challenges. That raises the question of whether middle-class living standards are within reach for middle-income Americans in today's economy. There are a number of ways to define middle income. I will primarily focus on households between the 40th and 70th percentiles of the income distribution. In 2018, these households had incomes between $40,000 and $85,000.3 To explore the issues associated with financial resilience and intergenerational financial well-being, it is necessary to go beyond measures of income and better understand household assets and liabilities. Today I will share with you findings from a promising new data resource developed by Federal Reserve staff, the Distributional Financial Accounts (DFAs). These accounts combine household-level data on balance sheets, incomes, and demographic characteristics of families in the United States from the triennial Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) with aggregate data from the Financial Accounts of the United States to track the distribution of these household assets and liabilities on a quarterly basis.4The timeliness of the data, which are currently available through the fourth quarter of 2018, can provide valuable insights into how different types of households are faring over the business cycle. I will also share some new results from the 2018 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which deliver further insights on the financial resilience of households, particularly those with low and moderate income, on an annual basis.5These results are slated for release soon. Wealth across HouseholdsLet us start by taking a look at how the wealth of middle-income households has evolved over recent years.6Over the past three decades, the wealth of middle-income households increased an average of about 1 percent per year, adjusted for inflation (figure 1).7That compares with average annual growth of 2.6 percent in real gross domestic income over this period. By comparison, the average wealth of the households in the top decile of the income distribution has increased three times faster per year, on average, than the wealth of middle-income households, more than doubling over the period as a whole. The past decade is even more sobering. Middle-income families still have not fully recovered the wealth they lost in the Great Recession. On average, households at all levels of income lost wealth as a result of the declines in asset prices and rise in unemployment during the crisis (figure 2). But the recovery in wealth since the Great Recession has been much less for middle- and lower-income households than for higher-income households. The wealth of the top 10 percent of households is 19 percent higher than before the recession, even after factoring in the decline in stock prices at the end of last year. In contrast, the wealth of middle-income families still has not returned to its pre-crisis level, and lower-income families have a wealth shortfall of 16 percent.8 The gap is also large in absolute terms. At the end of 2018, the average middle-income household had wealth of about $340,000, while the average households in the top 10 percent of the income distribution had wealth of about $4.5 million (figure 3). The average wealth of the top income decile is now 13 times higher than that of the middle-income group, while it was 7 times higher in 1989. Given these developments, it is no surprise that the share of wealth held by middle-income households has declined over the past three decades. However, the extent of the decline is nonetheless striking: Today the 30 percent of households between the 40th and 70th percentiles of the income distribution hold 13 percent of all wealth, down from 19 percent over the past three decades (figure 4). The top 10 percent of households by income now own 57 percent of all wealth—up from 47 percent 30 years ago. The 10 percent of households with the highest income hold more of the national wealth than the remaining 90 percent of households combined. Do Middle-Income Households Have Middle-Class Economic Security?Having sketched out the contours of the overall level and growth of wealth owned by middle-income households, let us now turn to economic security. Basic financial security is one important marker of the middle class. Wealth is an important source of economic resilience for households, allowing them to handle unexpected expenses as well as providing them with the financial security to manage the usual changes in income over a lifetime. When we dig into the various liquid savings, assets, and liabilities that underlie the overall wealth numbers for middle-income households, the picture suggests limited room to absorb volatility in cash flows. Many middle-income families have relatively little in easily accessible, or liquid, savings, carry a significant amount of debt, and are concerned about the adequacy of their retirement savings. Liquid savingsBy drawing from several household surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve, we can gain important insights into how assets and liabilities of middle-income households affect their economic security. Research based on the 2016 SCF shows that only about one-fourth of middle-income households have enough liquid savings to cover six months of expenses—the amount often recommended by financial advisers—and only 4 in 10 could cover three months of expenses.9The majority of middle-income households thus do not have sufficient liquid savings to weather a typical material financial disruption—for instance, one associated with a temporary job loss or illness. Even modest unexpected expenses could be disruptive for many middle-income families. According to the forthcoming results from the 2018 SHED, one-third of middle-income adults said that they would borrow money, sell something, or not be able to pay an unexpected $400 expense (figure 5).10Drilling down further indicates that while 6 percent of middle-income adults said they would not be able to pay the expense using any means, 27 percent would borrow or sell something to pay the expense. The reliance on credit to meet unexpected expenses is pronounced among those already carrying a balance on their credit cards. Nearly 3 in 10 middle-income adults carry a balance on their credit card most or all of the time, and the same households are five times as likely to borrow if faced with a $400 expense as those who never carry a balance. Borrowing money is not the only way that middle-income households cope with unexpected expenses. In 2018, one-fourth of middle-income adults said they skipped some kind of medical care because of its cost, suggesting insufficient savings can have implications for physical health as well as financial health. Thus, low levels of savings can create a challenging cycle when material disruptions in income, or even smaller unexpected expenses, spiral into a broader financial setback. Financial security in retirementA key component of middle-class financial security is the cushion of savings to cover retirement. Here, the DFAs suggest some progress. One of the innovations of the DFAs is that they include defined benefit plans from the Financial Accounts in addition to defined contribution plans, whereas measures of household pension wealth in the SCF are confined to the latter. The balances in defined contribution plans, such as 401(k)s, in which retirement savings accumulate in an account, are typically simpler to measure. By contrast, the value of defined benefit plans requires estimating how much the future fixed payments each year in retirement are worth today. These future payments are a sizable asset for households, currently estimated at about $15 trillion, or about 70 percent of total pension assets.11 The DFAs indicate that the average pension wealth for middle-income households—including both types of plans—has increased 2.5 percent per year over the past three decades (figure 6). Pension assets are now the largest asset held by middle-income households, representing 40 percent of their wealth, substantially exceeding the 22 percent share of home equity in their wealth. In part, the growth in pension balances reflects the sustained decrease in long-term interest rates over this period, which has boosted the value of the future fixed payments associated with defined benefit pensions. It reflects the aging of the population, since households near or in retirement age have the largest accumulated levels of pension savings and are also likely hold a relatively greater share of defined benefit plans (figure 7). How do we square the growth in pension assets with survey evidence indicating that many households in the middle of the income distribution are concerned that they will not have enough to live on in retirement? Only 35 percent of middle-income adults, who are not retired, say that their retirement saving is on track, and 16 percent of middle-income adults do not have any money saved for retirement.12In part, this may reflect the long-term shift by employers to defined contribution plans and away from defined benefit plans, especially in the private sector. While in 1989 more middle-income households had a defined benefit pension than a defined contribution plan, the reverse has been true since 1989.13With defined contribution plans, employees have to decide how much they will save and how they will invest, and they face uncertainty regarding how much savings will be available in retirement. Those who save and invest effectively can help secure their retirement. But those who opt out, save too little, or make investment choices that turn out to yield low returns may find themselves unprepared as retirement approaches, despite years of hard work. Two-thirds of middle-income adults who hold self-directed accounts, including defined contribution plans and individual retirement accounts, say that they have little or no comfort in managing the investments.14 Assets and liabilitiesStepping back, it is instructive to look at the evolution of the underlying assets and liabilities of middle-class households more broadly. The liabilities of the average middle-income household have nearly doubled over the past three decades, while assets have increased only 50 percent (figure 8). The gap between the relative growth of liabilities and assets peaked during the financial crisis and has narrowed somewhat for middle-income households more recently. While mortgages rose and fell sharply around the Great Recession, the rise in consumer debt, such as credit cards, auto loans, and student loans, has been relatively steady. The rapid growth in liabilities reflects both short-term cash flow management and longer-term investments. Taking on debt is an important way for middle-income families to help buffer unexpected expenses or a temporary loss of income, as indicated by the 8 in 10 middle-income adults who are at least somewhat confident that they could obtain an additional credit card if they applied for it.15Debt is also a critical mechanism for making key middle-class investments, which I turn to next. Investing in the FutureThere is a palpable sense that the opportunity to reach the middle class and remain in it is receding for many middle-income households. Many households find it challenging to make key middle-class investments because incomes at the middle are not keeping up with the rising costs of education and homeownership, and it is difficult to save enough. Often, making these investments requires having some savings in the first place—for instance, to make a down payment on a home, forgo income for a few years while paying tuition, or secure credit for a small business. Disparities by race and ethnicityThis challenge is compounded for some racial and ethnic minority groups that have experienced large and persistent racial gaps in wealth. In 2016, the average wealth of white households ($933,700) was seven times the average wealth of black households ($138,200) and five times that of Hispanic households ($191,200). Even among households at the middle of the income distribution, the average wealth in 2016 of white households ($277,200) was roughly one and a half times that of black households ($179,700) and nearly three times that of Hispanic households ($95,400).16Differences in educational attainment cannot fully account for these disparities: The average wealth of black households in which the head had a bachelor's degree ($271,200) was 26 percent less than that of white households in which the head did not attend college ($367,800).17 This matters not least because disparities in wealth often are inherited.18The prospects that a young person will reach the middle class often depend on attributes he or she inherits—such as the income, wealth, education, age, race, and ethnicity of his or her parents.19Beyond financial wealth, children inherit intangible assets that affect their ability to access information and social networks that help in obtaining jobs and taking advantage of educational and other wealth-building opportunities. HomeownershipOwning a home has been a key marker of middle-class status for many Americans. The accumulation of equity in a home is the primary form of wealth building and economic security for many middle-class families. Homeownership is valued for nonfinancial reasons as well, such as protection against unwanted moves and the freedom to make alterations and investments in the home.20 However, the financial crisis brought into focus that there are also risks associated with homeownership. Home equity—defined as the difference between the house value and the mortgage balance—for an average middle-income household peaked at $90,200 in late 2005, then declined by almost two-thirds through 2011 (figure 9). By the end of 2018, after several years of rising house prices, the home equity of the average middle-income family was still below the pre-recession peak and not much above the value in 1989. Middle-income households saw such steep declines in their average home equity during the Great Recession because they had taken on a high level of mortgage debt relative to their house values.21This high leverage amplified the effect of the fall in house prices on their wealth. Moreover, the homeownership rates of middle-income households also declined during the recession, so they did not benefit as much from the subsequent rebound in house prices since 2013 as did higher-income families. The recent decline in homeownership rates does not appear to reflect a change in attitudes toward homeownership, as recent surveys show that the desire to own a home remains strong.22Instead, it appears house prices are rising faster than income for many middle-income families, putting homeownership out of reach. By 2017, the median sales price for a single-family home was about four times median household income, up from three times median income in 1988.23The homeownership rate for middle-income families was 68 percent in 2016, down from its peak in 2004 of 74 percent.24For black households, the declines during and after the recession erased a decade of increases in homeownership—the homeownership rate for black households across the income spectrum was 42 percent in 2018, the same as the rate in the mid-1990s.25The homeownership rate of Hispanics also declined with the recession but has recovered somewhat, reaching 47 percent in 2018. With homeownership lower and home prices rising faster than incomes, renting is also taking a bigger slice of many middle-income households' earnings, leaving less savings for a down payment, an unexpected expense, or other investments. From 2007 to 2018, the share of income spent on rent rose from 18 percent to 25 percent for middle-income renters.26 Many middle-income families struggle to afford rent, particularly in the high-demand areas where jobs are most available, underscoring the need for more workforce housing. One way to increase the supply of middle-income housing is to reduce exclusionary zoning and other land-use restrictions that limit the supply of housing and keep prices high.27Often put in place in areas with single-family homes to block the development of affordable, multifamily housing, these policies also have contributed to the persistence of racially segregated neighborhoods. The challenge is to increase accessibility to workforce and affordable housing in ways that address legacy disparities.28 Skills, education, and student debtManufacturing and the skilled trades have provided an important pathway to the middle class for many workers, enabling them to own their homes, educate their children, and retire securely. Today, though, many face uncertainties associated with the decline in manufacturing jobs, the erosion of employee benefits, and reduced bargaining power. Increasingly, the onus is on individuals to ensure that their skills are marketable and up-to-date in a highly competitive global marketplace with growing automation. Juan Salgado, the chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago and our closing keynote speaker, has emphasized the role of community colleges in offering affordable, quality education and training.29Students can begin with a certificate program in advanced manufacturing and continue either to a bachelor's degree in engineering at a nearby public university or to the workplace, acquiring marketable skills likely at lower cost than if they had started at a four-year college. Similar programs around the country help provide accessible pathways to the middle class. For others, college is seen as an important pathway to middle-class economic security. The average wealth of households with a college degree significantly exceeds the average wealth of those without a college degree (figure 10). A key reason is that college graduates generally have higher incomes. Graduates with a bachelor's degree have median weekly earnings that are about 65 percent higher than high school graduates and unemployment rates that are 2 percentage points lower, and they are often better positioned to adapt to changes in the labor market.30 However, the cost of higher education has been rising, placing an increasing financial burden on many middle-income households. Between 2008 and 2018, tuition and fees at four-year public colleges rose more than six times faster than real median incomes.31Moreover, as Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Evans discussed, while there are benefits associated with attending college, there are also some financial risks, and the returns to education vary widely. While two-thirds of individuals with a bachelor's degree or more say that the lifetime financial benefits of their education exceed its costs, those who do not complete their degree are half as likely to report net benefits from their studies.32And some groups face higher barriers in accessing college: Children of parents who did not attend college are far less likely to attend college due to financial and informational barriers, and those who do start college are more likely to drop out.33 For many middle-income families, affording post-secondary education means taking on a sobering amount of student debt. Total student loan debt, in inflation-adjusted terms, more than doubled from 2006 to 2018 (figure 11).34Repayment of student loans can be challenging. In 2018, 2 in 10 middle-income adults with education debt were behind on their payments, and those who did not complete a degree were nearly twice as likely to be behind.35Repayment status also differs by the type of institution attended. Among middle-income adults with education debt, 30 percent who attended for-profit institutions were behind on student loan payments, compared with 17 percent of those who attended public institutions and 12 percent who attended not-for-profit private institutions. Investing in higher education may come at the cost of deferring or forgoing other investments. For example, higher tuition costs—reflected in increasing student loan debt—together with the rising costs of homeownership, have left many middle-income households in a poor position to save for a down payment or handle a mortgage. Researchers at the Fed have estimated that roughly 20 percent of the decline in homeownership among young adults can be attributed to their increased student loans since 2005. This suggests that more than 400,000 young individuals would have owned a home in 2014 had it not been for the rise in student debt.36 Businesses and stock ownershipAnother concern is that high debt may hinder people seeking to start a business. Starting a business is a classic pathway to securing a foothold in the middle class. This has been particularly true for members of some groups that historically have faced challenges in the labor market, particularly minorities and first-generation Americans.37 Aspiring small business owners with student loans may lack the financial ability to invest in starting a business while staying current on payments. One study found that individuals with student loan debt are less likely to start a business, and those who do are more likely to fall behind on their loan payments.38Another study found that growth in student loan debt resulted in a 14 percent reduction in small business formation in counties over a 10-year period.39 The personal assets of small business owners have been an important source of capital for entrepreneurs as they seek to start and sustain a small business. As wealth for middle-income households has stagnated, reliance on this source of capital has declined in recent years.40Very small firms depend heavily on personal debt for start-up and working capital. Owners of smaller firms often struggle to qualify for bank credit, and among those that apply and are denied, low credit scores and insufficient credit history are the most frequently cited reasons. More broadly, a key reason that middle-income households have not seen wealth increases commensurate with high-income households is that they have not benefited as much from the strong performance of stocks and privately held businesses. In inflation-adjusted terms, total business assets (including corporate stocks, mutual funds, and unincorporated businesses) have more than tripled since 1989. Similarly, the average business assets of top-income households have more than tripled since 1989. But the average business assets of middle-income families have grown only 31 percent since 1989 and are lower than they were before the Great Recession (figure 12). Stock market participation fell for middle-income families after the Great Recession, so they have not benefited as much from the subsequent rise in stock prices.41By 2018, the 30 percent of households in the middle of the income distribution held only 6 percent of aggregate business assets, while the top 10 percent of households held over three‑fourths. Maximum Employment, Wages, and WealthWith lower net worth and financial assets, the livelihoods of most middle-income families, other than retirees, depend primarily on compensation from working. So the robustness of labor income over time is central to the ability of middle-income families to achieve and maintain middle-class financial security. While the strengthening of the labor market over the course of this extended recovery has benefited middle-income families, the long-term decline in the share of national income going to wage earners is concerning. The Congress put maximum employment right at the heart of the Federal Reserve's mandate, alongside price stability. In fact, we are one of only a handful of central banks that have the explicit responsibility to promote maximum employment. Given that households at the middle of the income distribution rely primarily on wage income, our full employment mandate has served the country well during this extended recovery. The gains to workers, including those in the middle class, from the strong labor market are clear. Unemployment is now at 3.6 percent—its lowest level in 50 years. Employment rates of adults in their prime working years (ages 25 to 54) have been rising steadily during the expansion and recently reached their pre-recession peak of 80 percent.42Importantly, wage growth has begun to pick up after years of slow gains. It is notable that the near recovery in middle-class wealth from the Great Recession did not take hold until the labor market began to strengthen. While higher-income households saw their wealth begin to recover as soon as financial markets stabilized in early 2009, middle-income households did not see their wealth begin to recover until 2010, when the unemployment rate began to decline (figure 13). Even as we welcome the many benefits of the current strong job market, longer-term trends raise concerns. Labor market disparities by race have been an enduring feature of the labor market for decades. The unemployment rate of blacks, while near its historical low, remains at about 7 percent, twice the unemployment rate of whites. Recent research suggests that the strong labor market may be helping to narrow some of the long-standing disparities for some racial minorities and women, although the results are tentative and very modest.43 The progressive long-term decline in the share of national income that goes to workers through wages is concerning for middle-income households. The share going to workers—which economists call the labor share—translates into how much of our economic output shows up in people's paychecks. The decline in the labor share goes to the heart of the rising inequality of wealth and the unequal sharing of prosperity. Several explanations have been put forward for the decline in the labor share. The increasing concentration of industries into the hands of a few firms has likely reduced the bargaining power of workers.44Increasing automation in the workplace is also a factor, along with the ongoing effects of globalization and offshoring. Earnings have declined as the job market has shifted away from important middle-income occupations. Manufacturing, for example, employs vastly fewer people now than it has historically.45It is important to understand the relative importance of these different drivers, as they have different implications for the overall health of the economy and for policies to support middle-income families. Monetary policy aims to influence employment and inflation over the business cycle, as opposed to addressing these longer-run structural changes. But the distribution of income and wealth may have important implications for macroeconomic developments, such as the evolution of consumption, which is the single biggest engine of growth in our economy. That is why the Federal Reserve has a significant interest in understanding distributional developments and their implications. Recent research finds that households with lower levels of wealth spend a larger fraction of any income gains than households with higher levels of wealth.46Consequently, an economy that delivers an increasing share of income gains to high-wealth households could result in less growth in consumer demand than one in which the gains are distributed more equally. In fact, the recovery of consumer spending after the Great Recession was slower than the recovery in aggregate household income and net worth would previously have suggested, and rising inequality is one plausible explanation.47 ConclusionThe discrepancy between slow growth in income and wealth, on the one hand, and rising costs of housing, health care, and education, on the other, may be making it more difficult for middle-income families to achieve middle-class financial security. Long-term, the shifting of wealth and income to the top of the distribution and away from the middle could pose challenges to the health and resilience of our economy. These are important questions, and I am pleased that this conference is bringing to light interesting research to shed light on them. 1. I am grateful to Claudia Sahm of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text, along with Barbara Lipman, Kevin Moore, Karen Pence, Paul Smith, and Mike Zabek. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Take, for example, this statement attributed to Aristotle: "The best political community is formed by citizens of the middle class, and that those states are likely to be well-administered in which the middle class is large, and stronger if possible than both the other classes." See Constitutional Rights Foundation (2010), "Plato and Aristotle on Tyranny and the Rule of Law,"Bill of Rights in Action,vol. 26 (Fall), (quoted text under the heading "Aristotle's Politics").Return to text 3. This definition errs slightly on the higher side of what might be considered middle income, but the results are qualitatively robust to taking the middle third of the income distribution.Return to text 4. For more details on the construction of the DFAs, see Michael Batty, Jesse Bricker, Joseph Briggs, Elizabeth Holmquist, Susan McIntosh, Kevin Moore, Eric Nielsen, Sarah Reber, Molly Shatto, Kamila Sommer, Tom Sweeney, and Alice Henriques Volz (2019), "Introducing the Distributional Financial Accounts of the United States (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-017 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March). The publicly available DFAs data can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/efa/efa-distributional-financial-accounts.htm. Visualization tools for the data are forthcoming.Return to text 5. The SHED is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm.Return to text 6. The published data set includes data on the distribution of nominal wealth by wealth percentiles. For this speech, Board staff analyzed the data, with the wealth distribution by income percentiles and other demographic categories. Wealth and all of its subcomponents are reported here in 2018 dollars using the personal consumption expenditures price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (see table 1.1.4, which is available athttps://www.bea.gov). Wealth is defined as the sum of assets, including financial and nonfinancial assets, net of liabilities, including mortgages, consumer debt, and other liabilities.Return to text 7. Income groups at each point in time are defined here using current household income. Specific households may move across income groups over time. Since households in the high-income group during their working years may, in retirement, move to low- or middle-income groups, some of the wealth assigned to low- or middle-income groups in this analysis comes from households with high lifetime income.Return to text 8. Wealth in figure 2 is indexed to the first quarter of 2007, which is between the peak in house prices in 2006 and the start of the Great Recession at the end of 2007. As figure 2 shows, household wealth began declining before the recession officially began.Return to text 9. See Neil Bhutta and Lisa Dettling (2018), "Money in the Bank? Assessing Families' Liquid Savings using the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 19). In this study, "middle income" refers to households with income between the 25th and 75th percentiles. Income is defined as the "usual amount" of income the household earned in the previous year and could differ from the actual amount. Overall expenses are estimated using partial data on household expenses, including rent, mortgages payments, car loans, and food.Return to text 10. This statistic and the rest in this subsection are from the 2018 SHED and are only for middle-income adults. The SHED collects ranges of family income, not a dollar amount. Middle income is defined as the ranges of family income from $40,000 to $99,000, which is roughly the 40th to 70th percentiles.Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release Z.1, "Financial Accounts of the United States,"table L.117. For more information, see John Sabelhaus and Alice Henriques Volz (2019), "Are Disappearing Employer Pensions Contributing to Rising Wealth Inequality?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 1).Return to text 12. The data are from the 2018 SHED. Tabulations include only middle-income adults who are not retired. Retirement savings in the SHED include pensions, individual retirement accounts, and other savings for retirement.Return to text 13. The data source is the SCF (1989–2016). In 1989, 50 percent of middle-income households had a defined benefit pension, and 29 percent had a defined contribution pension, but by 1998, the relative ownership of each pension type had reversed to 36 percent and 43 percent, respectively. Since then, the rates have been fairly stable.Return to text 14. The data are from the 2018 SHED. The tabulation includes only middle-income adults, who have self-directed retirement accounts.Return to text 15. The 2018 SHED is the data source. Tabulations include only middle-income adults.Return to text 16. The source is the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm.Return to text 17. See Lisa J. Dettling, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, and Jeffrey P. Thompson (2017), "Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 27). See also, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, William Darity, Jr., Darrick Hamilton, Mark Paul, Alan Aja, Anne Price, Antonio Moore, and Caterina Chiopris (2018),What We Get Wrong about Closing the Racial Wealth Gap(PDF)(Durham, N.C.: Samuel DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity and Insight Center for Community Economic Development, Duke University, April).Return to text 18. See Laura Feiveson and John Sabelhaus (2018), "How Does Intergenerational Wealth Transmission Affect Wealth Concentration?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 1). See also Maury Gittleman and Edward N. Wolff (2004), "Racial Differences in Patterns of Wealth Accumulation,"Journal of Human Resources,vol. 39, (Winter), pp. 193–227.Return to text 19. See Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter (2018), "The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 25147 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October).Return to text 20. See Matthew Desmond (2016),Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City(New York: Crown).Return to text 21. See Lisa Dettling, Joanne Hsu, and Elizabeth Llanes (2018), "A Wealthless Recovery? Asset Ownership and the Uneven Recovery from the Great Recession," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 13). Their analysis focused on working-age households, and income classifications are based on the "usual amount" of income the household earns.Return to text 22. As one example, in March 2019, according to Fannie Mae's National Housing Survey, 69 percent of households say they would "buy" if they were going to move. See Fannie Mae's March 2019 Data Release, which is available on its website athttp://www.fanniemae.com/resources/file/research/housingsurvey/pdf/nhs-monthly-data-040819.pdf.Return to text 23. See Alexander Hermann (2018), "Price-to-Income Ratios Are Nearing Historic Highs," Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University,Housing Perspectives(blog), September 13.Return to text 24. The data are from the Survey of Consumer Finances.Return to text 25. See U.S. Census Bureau (2019), Current Population Survey/Housing Vacancy Survey, April 4,https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/data/ann18ind.html.Return to text 26. See Dettling, Hsu, and Llanes, "A Wealthless Recovery?" in note 23; and Jeff Larrimore and Jenny Schuetz (2017), "Assessing the Severity of Rent Burden on Low-Income Families," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 22).Return to text 27. Glaeser and Gyorko found that zoning restrictions increased the cost of housing by 25 percent or more in around 15 percent of cities in 2013 and doubled housing costs in about 6 percent of cities. SeeEdward Glaeser and Joseph Gyourko (2018), "The Economic Implications of Housing Supply,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 32 (Winter), pp. 3–30.Return to text 28. See Richard Rothstein (2017),The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America(New York: Liveright).Return to text 29. See Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (2019), "An Interview with Juan Salgado, Chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago: Charting Pathways to the Middle Class,"CDPS Blog,April 5.Return to text 30. See Elka Torpey (2018), "Measuring the Value of Education," Bureau of Labor Statistics,Career Outlook(blog), April.Return to text 31. Net tuition and fees at four-year public colleges increased 44 percent between 2008 and 2009 and between 2018 and 2019 (according to data from the College Board, which are available on its website athttps://trends.collegeboard.org/college-pricing/figures-tables/tuition-fees-room-and-board-over-time), while income increased about 7 percent in the same period (as indicated by U.S. Census Bureau data, which can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's FRED website athttps://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=nDPn). For more information, see College Board (2018),Trends in College Pricing 2018(PDF)(New York: CB).Return to text 32. The data are from the 2018 SHED. Tabulations include all adults (regardless of income) who attended any post-secondary program.Return to text 33. The 2018 SHED is the data source. Tabulations include all adults (regardless of income).Return to text 34. The data are from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release G.19, "Consumer Credit." For a comparison of various estimates of student loan debt, see Jesse Bricker, Meta Brown, Simona Hannon, and Karen Pence (2015), "How Much Student Debt Is Out There?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 7).Return to text 35. The 2018 SHED is the data source. Tabulations include middle-income adults who currently owe money for their own education and do not include those who have already paid off their education debts.Return to text 36. See Alvaro Mezza, Daniel Ringo, and Kamila Sommer (2019), "Can Student Loan Debt Explain Low Homeownership Rates for Young Adults?" Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Consumer & Community Context,vol. 1 (January), pp. 2–6.Return to text 37. African American women are one of the fastest-growing groups of entrepreneurs. See National Women's Business Council (2016), "New Report Highlights Challenges Faced by Black Women Entrepreneurs; Offers Roadmap for Solving Toughest Issues," press release, October 5. Immigrants compose approximately 15 percent of the U.S. workforce and around one-fourth of U.S. entrepreneurs. See Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr (2016), "Immigrant Entrepreneurship," NBER Working Paper Series 22385 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July). See also the minority-owned businesses special report of the Federal Reserve Banks' Small Business Credit Survey, which is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016.Return to text 38. See Karthik Krishnan and Pinshuo Wang (2018), "The Cost of Financing Education: Can Student Debt Hinder Entrepreneurship?"Management Science,published online inArticles in Advance,May 23.Return to text 39. See Brent W. Ambrose, Larry Cordell, and Shuwei Ma (2015), "The Impact of Student Loan Debt on Small Business Formation (PDF)," Working Paper Series 15-26 (Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, July),Return to text 40. See Arthur B. Kennickell, Myron L. Kwast, and Jonathan Pogach (2017), "Small Businesses and Small Business Finance during the Financial Crisis and the Great Recession: New Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," in John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, eds.,Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges,National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 291–349.Return to text 41. See Dettling, Hsu, and Llanes, "A Wealthless Recovery?" in note 23; and Bing Chen and Frank P. Stafford (2016), "Stock Market Participation: Family Responses to Housing Consumption Commitments,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 48 (June), pp. 635–59.Return to text 42. The data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 43. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.Return to text 44. José Azar, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall I. Steinbaum (2017), "Labor Market Concentration," NBER Working Paper Series 24147 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December; revised February 2019); Evan Starr, J.J. Prescott, and Norman Bishara, "Noncompetes in the U.S. Labor Force," University of Michigan Law and Economics Research Paper Series 18-013 (Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Law School, April); Sandeep Vaheesan (forthcoming), "Accommodating Capital and Policing Labor: Antitrust in the Two Gilded Ages,"Maryland Law Review; and David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen (2017), "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," NBER Working Paper Series 23396 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).Return to text 45. See David Autor and Anna Salomons (2018), "Is Automation Labor-Displacing? Productivity Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share (PDF)," paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 8–9; David H. Autor and David Dorn (2013), "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market,"American Economic Review, vol. 103 (August), pp. 1553–97.Return to text 46. See Jonathan Fisher, David Johnson, Timothy Smeeding, and Jeffrey Thompson (2019), "Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume Using the Distributions of Income, Consumption and Wealth (PDF)," Working Paper Series 19-4 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, February).Return to text 47. See Aditya Aladangady and Laura Feiveson (2018), "A Not-So-Great Recovery in Consumption: What Is Holding Back Household Spending?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 8).Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetingson April 22 and May 1, 2019. The minutes are attached.For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 30-May 1, 2019. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 30-May 1, 2019:HTML|PDF
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference "Strategies for Monetary Policy," Stanford University, Stanford, California It is an honor and a privilege to participate once again in this annual Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference. The topic of this year's conference, "Strategies for Monetary Policy," is especially timely. As you know, the Federal Reserve System is conducting a review of the strategy, tools, and communication practices we deploy to pursue our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In this review, we expect to benefit from the insights and perspectives that are presented today, as well as those offered at other conferences devoted to this topic, as we assess possible practical ways in which we might refine our existing monetary policy framework to better achieve our dual-mandate goals on a sustained basis. My talk today will not, however, be devoted to a broad review of the Fed's monetary policy framework—that process is ongoing, and I would not want to prejudge the outcome—but it will instead focus on some of the important ways in which economic models and financial market signals help me think about conducting monetary policy in practice after a career of thinking about it in theory.1 The Role of Monetary PolicyLet me set the scene with a very brief—and certainly selective—review of the evolution over the past several decades of professional thinking about monetary policy. I will begin with Milton Friedman's landmark 1967 American Economic Association presidential address, "The Role of Monetary Policy."2This article is, of course, most famous for its message that there is no long-run, exploitable tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. And in this paper, Friedman introduced the concept of the "natural rate of unemployment," which today we callu*.3What is less widely appreciated is that Friedman's article also contains a concise but insightful discussion of Wicksell's "natural rate of interest"—r* in today's terminology—the real interest rate consistent with price stability. But whileu* andr* provide key reference points in Friedman's framework for assessing how far an economy may be from its long-run equilibrium in labor and financial markets, they play absolutely no role in the monetary policy rule he advocates: his well-knownk-percent rule that central banks should aim for and deliver a constant rate of growth of a monetary aggregate. This simple rule, he believed, could deliver long-run price stability without requiring the central bank to take a stand on, model, or estimate eitherr* oru*. Although he acknowledged that shocks would pushuaway fromu* (and, implicitly,raway fromr*), Friedman felt the role of monetary policy was to operate with a simple quantity rule that did not itself introduce potential instability into the process by which an economy on its own would converge tou* andr*.4In Friedman's policy framework,u* andr* are economic destinations, not policy rule inputs. Of course, I do not need to elaborate for this audience that the history ofk-percent rules is that they were rarely tried, and when they were tried in the 1970s and the 1980s, they were found to work much better in theory than in practice.5Velocity relationships proved to be empirically unstable, and there was often only a very loose connection between the growth rate of the monetary base—which the central bank could control—and the growth rate of the broader monetary aggregates, which are more tightly linked to economic activity. Moreover, the macroeconomic priority in the 1980s in the United States, the United Kingdom, and other major countries was to do "whatever it takes" to break the back of inflation and to restore the credibility squandered by central banks that had been unable or unwilling to provide a nominal anchor after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. By the early 1990s, the back of inflation had been broken (thank you, Paul Volcker), conditions for price stability had been achieved (thank you, Alan Greenspan), and the time was right for something to fill the vacuum in central bank practice left by the realization that monetary aggregate targeting was not, in practice, a workable monetary policy framework. Although it was mostly unspoken, there was a growing sense at the time that a simple, systematic framework for central bank practice was needed to ensure that the hard-won gains from breaking the back of inflation were not given away by short-sighted, discretionary monetary experiments that were poorly executed, such as had been the case in the 1970s. Policy Rate RulesThat vacuum, of course, was filled by John Taylor in his classic 1993 paper, "Discretion vs. Policy Rules in Practice." Again, for this audience, I will not need to remind you of the enormous impact this single paper had not only on the field of monetary economics, but also—and more importantly—on the practice of monetary policy. For our purposes today, I will note that the crucial insight of John's paper was that, whereas a central bank could pick the "k" in a "k-percent" rule on its own, without any reference to the underlying parameters of the economy (includingr* andu*), a well-designed rule for setting a short-term interest rate as a policy instrument should, John argued, respect several requirements.6First, the rule should anchor the nominal policy rate at a level equal to the sum of its estimate of the neutral real interest rate (r*) and the inflation target. Second, to achieve this nominal anchor, the central bank should be prepared to raise the nominal policy rate by more than one-for-one when inflation exceeds target (the Taylor principle). And, third, the central bank should lean against the wind when output—or, via an Okun's law relationship, the unemployment rate—deviates from its estimate of potential (u*). In other words, whereas in Friedman'sk-percent policy ruleu* andr* are destinations irrelevant to the choice ofk, in the Taylor rule—and most subsequent Taylor-type rules—u* andr* are necessary inputs. As Woodford (2003) demonstrates theoretically, the first two requirements for a Taylor-type rule are necessary for it to be consistent with the objective of price stability. The third requirement—that monetary policy lean against the wind in response to an output or unemployment gap—not only contributes to the objective of price stability, but is also obviously desirable from the perspective of a central bank like the Fed that has a dual mandate. The Taylor approach to instrument-rule specification has been found to produce good macroeconomic outcomes across a wide range of macroeconomic models. Moreover, in a broad class of both closed and open economy dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, or DSGE, models, Taylor-type rules can be shown to be optimal given the underlying micro foundations of these models. In original formulations of Taylor-type rules,r* was treated as constant and set equal to 2 percent, and potential output was set equal to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates of potential output, or, in specifications using the unemployment rate as the activity variable,u* was set equal to the CBO's estimate of the natural unemployment rate. These assumptions were reasonable at the time, and I myself wrote a number of papers with coauthors in the years before the Global Financial Crisis that incorporated them.7 A Dive into Data DependenceFast-forward to today. At each Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, my colleagues and I consult potential policy rate paths implied by a number of policy rules, as we assess what adjustments, if any, may be required for the stance of monetary policy to achieve and maintain our dual-mandate objectives.8A presentation and discussion of several of these rules has been included in the semiannualMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress since July 2017.9One thing I have come to appreciate is that, as I assess the benefits and costs of alternative policy scenarios based on a set of policy rules and economic projections, it is important to recognize up front that key inputs to this assessment, includingu*andr*, are unobservable and must be inferred from data via models.10I would now like to discuss how I incorporate such considerations into thinking about how to choose among monetary policy alternatives. A monetary policy strategy must find a way to combine incoming data and a model of the economy with a healthy dose of judgment—and humility!—to formulate, and then communicate, a path for the policy rate most consistent with the central bank's objectives. There are two distinct ways in which I think that the path for the federal funds rate should be data dependent.11Monetary policy should be data dependent in the sense that incoming data reveal at any point in time where the economy is relative to the ultimate objectives of price stability and maximum employment. This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into interest rate feedback rules—after all, they have to feed back on something. Data dependence in this sense is well understood, as it is of the type implied by a large family of policy rules, including Taylor-type rules discussed earlier, in which the parameters of the economy needed to formulate such rules are taken as known. But, of course, key parameters needed to formulate such rules, includingu*andr*, are unknown. As a result, in the real world, monetary policy should be—and in the United States, I believe, is—data dependent in a second sense: Policymakers should and do study incoming data and use models to extract signals that enable them to update and improve estimates ofr*andu*. As indicated in the Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants have, over the past seven years, repeatedly revised down their estimates of bothu*andr*as unemployment fell and real interest rates remained well below prior estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation those earlier estimates would have predicted (figures1and2). And these revisions tou*andr*appeared to have had an important influence on the path for the policy rate actually implemented in recent years. One could interpret any changes in the conduct of policy as a shift in the central bank's reaction function. But in my view, when such changes result from revised estimates ofu* orr*, they merely reflect an updating of an existing reaction function. In addition tou* andr*, another important input into any monetary policy assessment is the state of inflation expectations. Since the late 1990s, inflation expectations appear to have been stable and are often said to be "well anchored." However, inflation expectations are not directly observable; they must be inferred from models, other macroeconomic information, market prices, and surveys. Longer-term inflation expectations that are anchored materially above or below the 2 percent inflation objective present a risk to price stability. For this reason, policymakers should and do study incoming data to extract signals that can be used to update and improve estimates of expected inflation. In many theoretical rational expectations models, expected inflation is anchored at the target level by assumption. From a risk-management perspective, it makes sense, I believe, to regularly test this assumption against empirical evidence. Financial Markets and Monetary Policy—Extracting Signal from NoiseBecause the true model of the economy is unknown, either because the structure is unknown or because the parameters of a known structure are evolving, I believe policymakers should consult a number and variety of sources of information about neutral real interest rates and expected inflation, to name just two key macroeconomic variables. Because macroeconomic models ofr* and long-term inflation expectations are potentially misspecified, seeking out other sources of information that are not derived from the same models can be especially useful. To be sure, financial market signals are inevitably noisy, and day-to-day movements in asset prices are unlikely to tell us much about the cyclical or structural position of the economy.12However, persistent shifts in financial market conditions can be informative, and signals derived from financial market data—along with surveys of households, firms, and market participants, data, as well as outside forecasts—can be an important complement to estimates obtained from historically estimated and calibrated macroeconomic models.13 Interest rate futures and interest rate swaps markets provide one source of high-frequency information about the path and destination for the federal funds rate expected by market participants (figure 3). Interest rate option markets, under certain assumptions, can offer insights about the entire ex ante probability distribution of policy rate outcomes for calendar dates near or far into the future (figure 4). And, indeed, when one reads that a future policy decision by the Fed or any central bank is "fully priced in," this is usually based on a "straight read" of futures and options prices. But these signals from interest rate derivatives markets are only a pure measure of the expected policy rate path under the assumption of a zero risk premium. For this reason, it is useful to compare policy rate paths derived from market prices with the path obtained from surveys of market participants, which, while subject to measurement error, should not be contaminated with a term premium. Market- and survey-based estimates of the policy rate path are often highly correlated. But when there is a divergence between the path or destination for the policy rate implied by the surveys and a straight read of interest rate derivatives prices, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence (for example, derived from the surveys of primary dealers and market participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York) as I do on the estimates obtained from market prices (figure 3). The Treasury yield curve can provide another source of information about the expected path and ultimate longer-run destination of the policy rate. But, again, the yield curve, like the interest rate futures strip, reflects not only expectations of the path of short-term interest rates, but also liquidity and term premium factors Thus, to extract signal about policy from noise in the yield curve, a term structure model is required. But different term structure models can and do produce different estimates of the expected path for policy and thus the term premium. Moreover, fluctuations in the term premium on U.S. Treasury yields are driven in part by a significant "global" factor, which complicates efforts to treat the slope of the yield curve as a sufficient statistic for the expected path of U.S. monetary policy (Clarida, 2018c). Again, here, surveys of market participants can provide useful information—for example, about "the expected average federal funds rate over the next 10 years," which provides an alternative way to identify the term premium component in the U.S. Treasury curve. Quotes from the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) market can provide valuable information about two key inputs to monetary policy analysis: long-runr* and expected inflation.14Direct reads of TIPS spot rates and forward rates are signals of the levels of real interest rates that investors expect at various horizons, and they can be used to complement model-based estimates ofr*. In addition, TIPS market data, together with nominal Treasury yields, can be used to construct measures of "breakeven inflation" or inflation compensation that provide a noisy signal of market expectations of future inflation. But, again, a straight read of breakeven inflation needs to be augmented with a model to filter out the liquidity and risk premium components that place a wedge between inflation compensation and expected inflation. As is the case with the yield curve and interest rate futures, it is useful to compare estimates of expected inflation derived from breakeven inflation data with estimates of expected inflation obtained from surveys—for example, the expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers (figure 5). Market- and survey-based estimates of expected inflation are correlated, but, again, when there is a divergence between the two, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence as on the market-derived estimates. The examples I have mentioned illustrate the important point that, in practice, there is not typically a clean distinction between "model-based" and "market-based" inference of key economic variables such asr* and expected inflation. The reason is that market prices reflect not only market expectations, but also risk and liquidity premiums that need to be filtered out to recover the object of interest—for example, expected inflation or long-runr*. This filtering almost always requires a model of some sort, so even market-based estimates of key inputs to monetary policy are, to some extent, model dependent. Implications for Monetary PolicyLet me now draw together some implications of the approach to models, markets, and monetary policy I have laid out in these remarks. Macroeconomic models are, of course, an essential tool for monetary policy analysis, but the structure of the economy evolves, and the policy framework must be—and I believe, at the Federal Reserve, is—nimble enough to respect this evolution. While financial market signals can and sometimes do provide a reality check on the predictions of "a model gone astray," market prices are, at best, noisy signals of the macroeconomic variables of interest, and the process of filtering out the noise itself requires a model—and good judgment. Survey estimates of the long-run destination for key monetary policy inputs can—and, at the Fed, do—complement the predictions from macro models and market prices (figure 6).15Yes, the Fed's job would be (much) easier if the real world of 2019 satisfied the requirements to run Friedman'sk-percent policy rule, but it does not and has not for at least 50 years, and our policy framework must and does reflect this reality. This reality includes the fact that the U.S. economy is in a very good place. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, real wages are rising in line with productivity, inflationary pressures are muted, and expected inflation is stable. Moreover, the federal funds rate is now in the range of estimates of its longer-run neutral level, and the unemployment rate is not far below many estimates ofu*. Plugging these estimates into a 1993 Taylor rule produces a federal funds rate very close to our current target range for the policy rate.16So with the economy operating at or very close to the Fed's dual-mandate objectives and with the policy rate in the range of FOMC participants' estimates of neutral, we can, I believe, afford to be data dependent—in both senses of the term as I have discussed—as we assess what, if any, further adjustments in our policy stance might be required to maintain our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. ReferencesBauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2018). "Interest Rates under Falling Stars," FRBSF Working Paper 2017-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, December (revised January 2019). Bennett, Amanda (1995). "Inflation Calculus: Business and Academia Clash over a Concept: 'Natural' Jobless Rate,"Wall Street Journal,January 24. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018).Monetary Policy Report(PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, July, ——— (2019).Monetary Policy Report(PDF). Washington: Board of Governors, February, Campbell, John Y., and Richard H. Clarida (1987). "The Dollar and Real Interest Rates,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 27 (August), pp. 103–39. Clarida, Richard H. (1999). Comment on John B. Taylor (1999), "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules (PDF)," chapter 7 in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 341–44. ——— (2018a). "Outlook for the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy," speech given at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 25. ——— (2018b). "Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy," speech at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27. ——— (2018c). "The Factor Content of Equilibrium Exchange Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 24735. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707. ——— (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. D'Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei (2018). "Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices,"Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,vol. 53 (February), pp. 395–436. Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti (2017). "Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 235–94. Edge, Rochelle M., Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2005). "Monetary Policy and Shifts in Long-Run Productivity Growth," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, May. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Eusepi, Stefano, and Bruce Preston (2018). "The Science of Monetary Policy: An Imperfect Knowledge Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 56 (March), 3–59. Federal Open Market Committee (2019). "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)" (adopted effective January 24, 2012; amended as effective January 29, 2019). Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Friedman, Milton (1948). "A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability,"American Economic Review,vol. 38 (June), pp. 245–64. ——— (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March), pp. 1–17. ——— (1984). "Financial Futures Markets and Tabular Standards,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 92 (February), pp. 165–67. Hall, Robert E., and Thomas J. Sargent (2018). "Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Milton Friedman's Presidential Address,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 32 (Winter), pp. 121–34. Henderson, Dale W., and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993). "A Comparison of Some Basic Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Different Degrees of Instrument Adjustment and Wage Persistence,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 221–317. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (S1, May), pp. S59–75. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). "A Time Series Model of Interest Rates with the Effective Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-033. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). "What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Kim, Don H., and Jonathan H. Wright (2005). "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Laidler, David (2018). "Why the Fuss? Friedman (1968) after Fifty Years," Department of Economics Research Report 2018-4. London, Ont.: Department of Economics, University of Western Ontario, May. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. Lewis, Kurt F., and Francisco Vazquez-Grande (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: Alternative Specifications (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February (revised May 2017). Lubik, Thomas A., and Christian Matthes (2015). "Time-Varying Parameter Vector Autoregressions: Specification, Estimation, and an Application," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Quarterly,vol. 101 (Fourth Quarter), pp. 323–52. Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2018). "Friedman's Presidential Address in the Evolution of Macroeconomic Thought,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 32 (Winter), pp. 81–96. Nelson, Edward (2018). "Seven Fallacies concerning Milton Friedman's 'The Role of Monetary Policy,' (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-013. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Phelps, Edmund S. (1967). "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment over Time,"Economica, vol. 34 (August), pp. 254–81. Poole, William (1970). "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 84 (May), pp. 197–216. Priebsch, Marcel A. (2017). "A Shadow Rate Model of Intermediate-Term Policy Rate Expectations," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 4. Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets,"European Economic Review,vol. 41 (June), pp. 1111–46. ——— (1999). "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 607–54. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. ——— (1995). "Changes in American Economic Policy in the 1980s: Watershed or Pendulum Swing?"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 33 (June), pp. 777–84. ——— (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules (PDF)," in John B. Taylor, ed.,Monetary Policy Rules.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319–41. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Ed Nelson and Bob Tetlow for their assistance in preparing this speech.Return to text 2. See Friedman (1968). Recent retrospectives on Friedman's (1968) American Economic Association address that consider its implications for monetary policy analysis include Hall and Sargent (2018), Laidler (2018), Mankiw and Reis (2018), and Nelson (2018).Return to text 3. See Friedman (1968, pp. 8–11). At roughly the same time, Phelps (1967) derived similar results using a formal economic model.Return to text 4. Another consideration motivating Friedman's choice of rule was his concern that a more active monetary policy strategy might be difficult to formulate because of the "long and variable lags" in the effect of monetary policy (a term he had coined in Friedman (1948, p. 254)).Return to text 5. See Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999, Result 10, p. 1687). Monetary targeting was adopted to a limited degree by the Federal Reserve and other central banks in the 1970s and 1980s, but it did not endure. Even during the period from 1979 to 1982, when the Federal Open Market Committee was most focused on monetary aggregates, policymakers were still concerned with interest rates in the setting of policy, and ultimate objectives for the output gap and inflation figured as criteria for policy decisions. See, for example, Taylor (1995, 1999), Clarida (1999), and Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000). In addition, Poole (1970) and Woodford (2003) are key references on the theoretical criticisms of monetary targeting.Return to text 6. On the specification and properties of the Taylor rule, see especially Taylor (1993, 1999) as well as Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999, 2000) and Woodford (2003). Another key study of simple interest rate rules was Henderson and McKibbin (1993). It should be noted that a Taylor type rule is aninstrumentrule for achieving the inflation objective that enters the rule. In practice, it is one way to implement a flexible inflation targeting regime. See Bernanke and others (1999) and Svensson (1997, 1999) for important contributions on the considerations involved in specifying an inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy.Return to text 7. See, for example, Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999, 2000).Return to text 8. For the FOMC's description of its mandate, see the FOMC's (2019) Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. The FOMC first adopted this statement in January 2012 and has reaffirmed the statement at the start of each subsequent year (including this year, when all 17 FOMC participants supported it).Return to text 9. The box "Monetary Policy Rules and Systematic Monetary Policy" in the Board's February 2019Monetary Policy Report(MPR) describes how simple policy rules are used in theory and in practical policymaking. See Board of Governors (2019). The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the July 2018 MPR discusses how shifts inr*complicate monetary policy decision making. See Board of Governors (2018). A note, titled "Policy Rules and How Policymakers Use Them," on the Board's website covers similar ground and is available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-rules-and-how-policymakers-use-them.htm.Return to text 10. As Friedman once put it, "I don't know what the natural rate is, neither do you, and neither does anyone else" (quoted in Bennett (1995)).Return to text 11. See Clarida (2018a, 2018b).Return to text 12. Uncertainty regardingr*,u*, and long-term inflation expectations is not the only source of uncertainty that has implications for monetary policy. Edge, Laubach, and Williams (2005) show how the duration of a productivity shock can affect even the direction of the best monetary policy response. Erceg and others (2018) find that even in conditions of substantial output gap uncertainty and uncertainty about the slope of the Phillips curve, a notable response to the estimated output gap in a Taylor-type rule is generally beneficial. And Eusepi and Preston (2018) show that replacing model-consistent expectations with forms of adaptive learning means that some, but not all, of the key results regarding best conduct in monetary policy under full information carry through.Return to text 13. Like many others, I believe that monetary policy should respond to financial market fluctuations when they have material implications for our outlook for employment and inflation, but monetary policy should not generally target asset prices themselves.The Federal Reserve uses survey data and conducts surveys of its own on a range of macroeconomic and financial conditions. Among the surveys the Fed conducts are the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices and the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms. In addition, the staff at the Federal Reserve Board uses disaggregated and high-frequency data to estimate the state of the economy in real time. Such data include disaggregated labor market data from ADP and data on expenditures from credit card transactions.Return to text 14. Well before the launch of the TIPS market, Friedman (1984) stressed the benefits to monetary policy analysis that would arise from the availability of market-based estimates of longer-term inflation expectations, and he contrasted that situation with the one then prevailing, in which it was difficult to ascertain the real yields implied by the market's longer-term nominal yields. In a similar vein, Campbell and Clarida (1987, p. 105) observed—also in the pre-TIPS era—that "it is hard to measure expected long-term inflation rates."Return to text 15. It is important to note that the range of model estimates that is shown in the shaded portion of figure 6 is not a confidence interval. If parameter uncertainty in the estimates was allowed for, the range would be wider still. Yield curve data can also be used to compute estimates of the neutral rate of interest, as in Bauer and Rudebusch (2019).Return to text 16.Figure 7summarizes the overall pattern displayed over time of various model-based estimates ofr*. Recentr* estimates from the models considered, as well as their confidence intervals, are shown infigure 8. The sources for both figures are given at the bottom of figure 8.Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Developments in Empirical Macroeconomics," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to take part in today's "Developments in Empirical Macroeconomics" conference. I would like to use my time here to talk about a topic of interest to many central bankers and macroeconomists: the interaction of monetary policy and financial stability. As you well know, monetary policy has powerful effects on financial markets, the financial system, and the broader economy. Conversely, financial instability, by impairing the provision of credit and other financial services, can depress economic growth, cause job losses, and push inflation too low. Accordingly, financial stability, through its effects on the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices, must be a consideration in the setting of monetary policy. Against this backdrop, a natural—yet quite complex—question is whether monetary policy should be used topromotefinancial stability. This question is hotly debated in a large and growing academic literature, and any serious answer has to be subject to considerable nuance. At the same time, my sense is that the balance is clearly tilted toward the conclusion that macroprudential policies—through-the-cycle resilience, stress tests, and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB)—may be better targeted to promoting financial stability than monetary policy.1 Before I wade into the lessons from past research and experience, I would like to highlight that this question is not just academic. As you know, the economy, monetary policy, and financial stability are intertwined. For example, the past three recessions were preceded by some combination of elevated asset prices, rapid increases in borrowing by businesses and households, and excessive risk-taking in the financial sector. These financial vulnerabilities have amplified adverse shocks to the overall economy time and again. Such concerns have resurfaced among some observers, as the current long expansion has brought business borrowing to new heights. My own assessment is that even though business debt is elevated, at least by some measures, overall financial stability risks are not, as the financial sector has substantial loss-absorbing capacity and is not overly reliant on unstable short-term funding. Yet, even if the risk of financial system disruption does not seem high, it well remain true that if the economy weakens, some businesses may default on this debt, potentially leading to a contraction in investment, a slow-down in hiring, and possibly to an unusual tightening in financial conditions. These concerns highlight how cyclical factors influencing monetary policy borrowers may overlap with financial stability considerations. How Monetary Policy Can Influence Financial StabilityLet me begin by laying out how monetary policy can influence financial stability. Monetary policy, operating primarily through adjustments in the level of short-term interest rates, has powerful effects on the entire financial system. A more accommodative monetary policy lowers interest rates across the maturity spectrum. The textbook result is that mortgage rates and corporate borrowing rates, among others, decline; equity prices rise; and the dollar exchange rate depreciates. In other words, financial conditions broadly ease, spurring households to buy more and businesses to invest and hire, thereby supporting economic growth and price stability.2 Monetary policy, however, if too accommodative, may lead to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities. These incentives arrive through a number of channels. For instance, low interest rates reduce the cost of borrowing, and so may prompt businesses and households to overborrow. Low rates may lead to a speculative bubble by compressing risk premiums for assets—such as equity, corporate bonds, and housing—and potentially leading investors to extrapolate price gains into the future in a bout of irrational exuberance. Low rates may also squeeze the profitability of financial intermediaries through narrow interest margins and other factors. In turn, these intermediaries as well as investors that had promised fixed nominal rates of return—such as insurance companies and pension funds—may "reach for yield," or take on more credit or duration risk in their portfolios in order to maintain high returns. Taken to extremes, this story often does not end well. Periods of excessive leverage, rapid credit growth, or buoyant credit market sentiment increase the risk to economic growth.3 These dynamics point to the possibility that accommodative monetary policy, while necessary to support activity during the early stages of an economic expansion, may also increase vulnerabilities in the financial system, especially if maintained for too long. These vulnerabilities weaken the financial system's ability to absorb negative shocks, and so when a shock arrives, losses mount, the financial system weakens, lending slows, and economic activity slows by more than it would have otherwise, potentially leading to an economic downturn or a more severe recession. Should Financial Vulnerabilities Affect the Stance of Monetary Policy?These observations lead to the important question of whether and how financial vulnerabilities should affect the setting of monetary policy. One simple framework for evaluating the tradeoffs associated with actively setting monetary policy to lean against the buildup of financial vulnerabilities is to examine the costs and benefits of such a policy in terms of unemployment and inflation. In this approach, the costs of tightening monetary policy in response to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities are lower employment and potentially below target inflation in the near term. The benefits are possibly reducing the risk of a future financial crisis, an event likely associated with a much larger fall in employment and inflation. One view is that monetary policy curbs household and business borrowing only modestly but can boost the unemployment rate notably. And so using monetary policy to damp borrowing does more harm than good. According to this view, using monetary policy to lean against financial vulnerabilities does not generate significant net benefits and may be counterproductive—increasing unemployment and decreasing inflation below a desired level with little reduction in risks to financial stability.4 At the same time, some research has identified circumstances under which the benefits of using monetary policy to lean against financial vulnerabilities could outweigh the costs.5A key consideration is the estimated amount of economic activity lost in a financial crisis—and some research suggests such losses may be quite large, which raises the benefits of leaning against imbalances. Similarly, monetary policy may affect a broad range of financial imbalances—excessively high house or equity prices and leverage within the financial sector—and the full set of these effects could shift the risk of financial instability sufficiently, at least under some circumstances, to make leaning against financial vulnerabilities with monetary policy desirable. The broader point is that we do not fully understand the cost–benefit tradeoff and whether monetary policy adjustments for financial stability reasons may be appropriate at some times. Whither Macroprudential Policy?Of course, there is one additional and critical factor to consider when weighing adjustments to the stance of monetary policy for financial stability reasons: the availability and efficacy of other instruments to promote financial stability. After all, the pursuit of multiple goals—full employment, price stability, and financial stability, for example—likely requires multiple tools. This is just common sense. Economists have a name for this common-sense notion: the Tinbergen principle. Effective supervisory, regulatory, and macroprudential policy tools appear to be well placed to address financial vulnerabilities. In particular, these tools may be used to increase the resilience of the financial sector against a broad range of adverse shocks and, perhaps, lean against the buildup of specific financial vulnerabilities. At the Federal Reserve, we have emphasized a set of structural, or through-the-cycle, regulatory and supervisory policies as our primary macroprudential tools to promote financial stability. These measures include strong capital and liquidity requirements for banks, especially the largest and most systemic institutions. In addition, our supervisory stress tests evaluate the ability of large banks to weather severe economic stress and the failure of their largest counterparty as well as examining the risk‑management practices of the firms. Moreover, the stress-test scenarios are designed to generally be more severe during buoyant economic periods when vulnerabilities may build. Furthermore, our stress tests consider the potential effects of specific risks we have identified in our financial stability monitoring work. For example, the tests in recent years have included hypothetical severe strains in corporate debt markets, exploring the resilience of the participating banks to the risks associated with the increase in business borrowing. In addition, the Federal Reserve monitors a wide range of indicators for signs of potential risks to financial stability that may merit a policy response, and we now publish a summary of this monitoring in our semiannualFinancial Stability Report. If vulnerabilities are identified as being meaningfully above normal, the Federal Reserve can require large banks to increase their loss-absorbing capacity through increases in the CCyB.6 Despite all of these efforts, we understand that these tools have limitations. First, central bankers' experience with macroprudential tools, including the CCyB, is limited. Second, regulation and macropudential tools can reduce economic efficiency and hamper economic growth by limiting the ability of the market to allocate financial resources. For this reason, the Federal Reserve has been evaluating ways in which our supervisory and financial stability goals can be achieved more efficiently, and it has been participating in global efforts to evaluate the effects of reforms under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board. Third, macroprudential policies that are targeted to banks may create an incentive for financial intermediation to migrate outside of the regulated banking system. The vulnerabilities may still emerge, albeit elsewhere in the financial system—perhaps in institutions or structures that are less stable and resilient than our banks. In part reflecting these incentives, we regularly monitor financial intermediation both inside and outside of the banking system. SummaryTo sum up, while there is evidence that financial vulnerabilities have the potential to translate into macroeconomic risks, a general consensus has emerged that monetary policy should be guided primarily by the outlook for unemployment and inflation and not by the state of financial vulnerabilities. Financial system resilience, supported by strong through-the-cycle regulatory and supervisory policies, remains a key defense against financial system and macroeconomic shocks. There is a clear need for new theory and empirics to address the questions about monetary policy and financial stability I have posed today. I encourage you to continue to contribute to these answers. By engaging the help of the wider academic community, conferences such as this one provide an invaluable opportunity to make progress on issues of great importance for economic policy. References Adrian, Tobias, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone (2019). "Vulnerable Growth,"American Economic Review,vol. 109 (April), pp. 1263–89. Adrian, Tobias, and Nellie Liang (2018). "Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 14 (January), pp. 73–131. Ajello, Andrea, Thomas Laubach, David López-Salido, and Taisuke Nakata (2019). "Financial Stability and Optimal Interest Rate Policy,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 15 (March), pp. 279–326. Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1995). "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 9 (Fall), pp. 27–48. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,1st ed., vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–442. Gourio, Francois, Jae W. Sim, and Anil K. Kashyap (2018). "The Trade Offs in Leaning against the Wind,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 66 (March), pp. 70–115. Kiley, Michael T. (2018). "Unemployment Risk (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-067. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2017). "Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 132 (August), pp. 1373–1426. Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner (2017). "Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 132 (November), pp. 1755–1817. Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor (2012). "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008,"American Economic Review,vol. 102 (April), pp. 1029–61. Svensson, Lars E.O. (2014). "Inflation Targeting and 'Leaning against the Wind,'"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 103–114. ——— (2017). "Cost–Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 90 (October), pp. 193–213. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For reviews of the various monetary policy transmission channels to the real economy, see Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).Return to text 3. See, among others, Schularick and Taylor (2012); López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajsek (2017); Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017); Adrian, Boyarchenko, Giannone (2019); and Kiley (2018).Return to text 4. See, for instance, Svensson (2014, 2017).Return to text 5. See, for example, Ajello, Laubach, López-Salido, and Nakata (2018); Guorio, Sim, and Kashyap (2018); and Adrian and Liang (2018).Return to text 6. CCyB also builds financial-sector resilience during periods when financial vulnerabilities are high and there is a risk of potential losses within the banking sector that could strain the supply of credit. Furthermore, the CCyB might be a more effective tool than monetary policy to mitigate financial vulnerabilities, as the benefits are comparable to those of using monetary policy while the costs are an order of magnitude smaller.Return to text
Alice Rivlin, who served as Vice Chair of the Board of Governors from 1996 to 1999, made great and lasting contributions as a leader and economic policymaker and broke barriers as a woman in the economics profession. I valued our friendship and extend my deepest sympathy to her family. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on May 16, 2019. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, Members of the Committee, thank you for your time and for your invitation to testify today on the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision of the financial system. My visit comes 10 years, almost to the day, after the Federal Reserve released the results of its first supervisory stress tests.1That exercise was an invention of both urgency and necessity and a tool to move the country's largest financial institutions towards safety and stability. Many innovations from that period are now regular elements of the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory work. These innovations have helped strengthen firms that were damaged by the crisis; given supervisors and the public a clearer view of risks in the financial system; and provided a solid foundation for the nation's economic recovery. Economic and market conditions have afforded us the time and opportunity to refine and improve the post-crisis regulatory framework. Now—when the financial system and economy are in good health—is the time to consolidate the insights we have gained and to better the framework we have built. Since my last appearance before this Committee, the Federal Reserve has taken several steps to improve the framework, by integrating post-crisis innovations more fully into our supervisory processes; directing our attention and resources to the places and institutions that merit them most; and making our regulatory standards as simple, efficient, and transparent as possible. Today, I will briefly review those steps; outline the Supervision and Regulation Report that accompanies my testimony2; and discuss our other engagement on community, consumer, and financial stability issues, both at home and abroad. Regulatory Tailoring and Supervision and Regulation ReportAlmost a year ago, Congress passed the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (ERRCPA).3A cornerstone of this legislation was a directive to the regulatory agencies to tailor oversight of institutions to ensure that our regulations match the character of the firms we regulate, with specific congressional direction for firms between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets. The Board's Supervision and Regulation Report centers on our recent efforts to accomplish this goal. The core of these efforts are two sets of regulatory proposals, which better align the application of our prudential standards to the risk profiles of different banking firms.4Both sets derive from careful analysis and have benefitted from collaboration with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). The proposals share a common goal: to focus our energy and attention on both the institutions that pose the greatest risks to financial stability and the activities that are most likely to challenge safety and soundness. The most recent proposal addresses prudential requirements for the U.S. operations of foreign banks. Like last year's tailoring proposal for domestic institutions, it categorizes firms according to their size, business model, and risk profile. Certain aspects differ from the domestic proposal, however, to reflect the unique characteristics of foreign banks operating in the United States, while preserving faithfulness to the principles of national treatment and competitive equity. The proposal also asks for input on a number of important issues, and I look forward to reviewing the comments we receive. These proposals are only one aspect of our efforts to implement last year's legislation. We also have been providing targeted regulatory relief, especially for community banks and other less complex organizations. Many of the regulatory developments implement statutory changes, but they also align with a long-held Federal Reserve policy of directing more resources to the most complex institutions and the most pressing risks. To that end, I am aware that policy changes in Washington can only succeed if they are accompanied by consistent implementation in the field. Deliberate, thoughtful supervision is essential, not only to translate regulatory standards into practice, but also to monitor whether rules are working as intended. I have been visiting supervisory and examination staff across the Federal Reserve System to discuss these issues and to help ensure that the activities of field examiners and policymakers are fully aligned. I plan to continue doing so in the months ahead. The report accompanying my testimony provides more details on these recent regulatory steps, as well as on the overall condition of the banking system. On that front, I am happy to share positive news. Banking institutions of all shapes and sizes continue to show greater loan volumes and fewer delinquencies. Capital levels remain high, and nonperforming loan ratios remain well below their five-year averages. The banking sector often reflects the health of the overall economy, and we continue to monitor emerging risks across the system to ensure institutions of all sizes can maintain their safety and soundness throughout the business cycle. Regulatory and Supervisory ActivitiesSupervisory stress testing has become a potent tool for understanding these emerging risks. Its original purpose, however, was much narrower. Even after months of extraordinary public support, the financial system a decade ago remained exceedingly fragile. To relieve strain on the banking system and recapitalize the sector, markets needed credible information, which was then in short supply.9The first crisis-era stress test provided such insight when it was available from few other sources; it was an analysis of last resort, which marked a turning point in the crisis. As conditions changed, the role of stress testing changed as well. Today, the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) provides a forward-looking measurement of bank capital, a view of risks across the sector, and a broader understanding of the health of the financial system. As the environment in which we conduct our stress tests evolves, our stress testing processes should evolve commensurately. In the past half year, the Board took steps to consolidate the role that stress testing plays in our work. Following the directive from the EGRRCPA, we began to transition less complex CCAR firms to an extended testing cycle, reflecting the lower risks they pose relative to their larger, more complex peers.10We published new details of our methodology and models, improving public understanding of the program and maintaining the integrity of its results.11We announced a new stress testing conference, inviting the broad participation, insight, and challenge that are essential for effectiveness.12And, while maintaining a rigorous evaluation of capital planning, we committed to addressing qualitative deficiencies at most firms through supervisory ratings and enforcement actions, rather than through a stand-alone qualitative objection.13 This core challenge—of keeping our supervisory processes strong, while adapting them to evolving circumstances—is not unique to stress testing. The Board, OCC, and FDIC face a similar task involving the modernization of rules implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The value of this statute, which affirms the obligation of banks to meet the credit needs of their communities, is clear. To meet the core objective of the statute, our CRA regulatory framework and supervisory processes must evolve, adjusting to a financial sector being reshaped by technology, consolidation, and other forces. This year, we at the Fed have organized dozens of outreach meetings across the country and hosted a research symposium on this subject, in support of an interagency effort that includes the OCC's issuance of an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. We intend this effort to ensure that the CRA continues to serve low- and moderate-income communities effectively.14 Other recent steps support our supervisory and regulatory framework by making it simpler and more transparent. A new ratings system for large institutions aligns more closely with the supervisory feedback they receive, offering greater clarity on our expectations and the consequences of falling short.15A new proposal would formalize how the Board determines one company's control of another, clarifying and inviting feedback on an important concept that, among other things, determines the perimeter of the Board's regulatory authority.16We continue to monitor other new developments in the industry as well, like the impact of new technology on core banking services, third-party due diligence processes, cyber risk, and vendor risk management. Effective and efficient regulation requires collaboration, both at home and abroad. We continue to engage with our regulatory counterparts overseas, through standard-setting bodies and the Financial Stability Board (FSB), where I recently began a three-year term as Chair. In establishing the FSB, the G20, led by the United States, recognized that the risks that sparked the financial crisis did not stop at national boundaries. International standards for supervision and regulation help ensure that U.S. firms can play on a level playing field in global competition, foster our own domestic financial stability, and help prevent the fragmentation of financial markets. To secure the full benefits of these standards, the work we undertake with these bodies must also evolve.17We must continue to evaluate the post-crisis reforms, address any adverse unintended effects, and identify and manage emerging vulnerabilities. ConclusionThe strength of our financial system today rests on the insight, patience, and persistence of a decade's work on post-crisis reforms.18Those same virtues are essential to preserving that strength in the years to come. We must invite ideas and input into our regulatory and supervisory activities openly, examine them rigorously and objectively, and travel patiently and steadily wherever our analysis leads. A diligent, objective, and independent approach is the only way to remain vigilant towards new risks and ensure that our financial system can continue to address the needs of the U.S. economy. Only by thoughtfully evaluating the reforms we have made, and adjusting our approach when appropriate, can we preserve and improve the efficacy and efficiency of our regulatory framework. Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC release results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program,"news release, May 7, 2009.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Supervision and Regulation Report," (PDF)May 10, 2019.Return to text 3. EGRRCPA, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles,"news release, October 31, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on regulatory framework that would more closely match rules for foreign banks with the risks they pose to U.S. financial system,"news release, April 8, 2019.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Agencies propose community bank leverage ratio for qualifying community banking organizations,"news release, November 21, 2018.Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Agencies issue final rules expanding examination cycles for qualifying small banks and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks,"news release, December 21, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions,"news release, November 7, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement,"news release, August 28, 2018. While holding companies that meet the conditions of the small bank holding company policy statement are excluded from consolidated capital requirements, their depository institutions continue to be subject to minimum capital requirements.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Statement regarding the impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA)," (PDF)July 6, 2018. The Board also participated in a recent proposal that would modify resolution planning requirements. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,"Agencies invite comment on modifications to resolution plan requirements; proposal keeps existing requirements for largest firms and reduces requirements for firms with less risk,"news release, April 16, 2019.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Agencies propose rule regarding the treatment of high volatility commercial real estate,"news release, September 18, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission,"Agencies invite comment on a proposal to exclude community banks from the Volcker rule,"news release, December 21, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Federal agencies issue a joint statement on banks and credit unions sharing resources to improve efficiency and effectiveness of Bank Secrecy Act compliance,"news release, October 3, 2018; see also Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board issues joint statement encouraging depository institutions to explore innovative approaches to meet BSA/anti-money laundering compliance obligations and to further strengthen the financial system against illicit financial activity,"news release, December 3, 2018.Return to text 9. SeeBen S. Bernanke,"Stress Testing Banks: What Have We Learned?"(speech at the "Maintaining Financial Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail" financial markets conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, GA, April 8, 2013).Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board releases scenarios for 2019 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and Dodd-Frank Act stress test exercises,"news release, February 5, 2019.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board finalizes set of changes that will increase the transparency of its stress testing program for nation's largest and most complex banks,"news release, February 5, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board releases document providing additional information on its stress testing program,"news release, March 28, 2019.Return to text 12. See Randal K. Quarles,"Inviting Participation: The Public's Role in Stress Testing's Next Chapter"(speech at the Council for Economic Education, New York, NY, February 6, 2019).Return to text 13. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board announces it will limit the use of the 'qualitative objection' in its Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercise, effective for the 2019 cycle,"news release, March 6, 2019.Return to text 14. See Jerome H. Powell,"Brief Remarks"(speech at the Just Economy Conference sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, DC, March 11, 2019); Lael Brainard,"Strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act: What Are We Learning?"(speech at "Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, February 1, 2019).Return to text 15. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board finalizes new supervisory rating system for large financial institutions,"news release, November 2, 2018.Return to text 16. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on proposal to simplify and increase the transparency of rules for determining control of a banking organization,"news release, April 23, 2019.Return to text 17. SeeRandal K. Quarles,"Ideas of Order: Charting a Course for the Financial Stability Board"(speech at Bank for International Settlements Special Governors Meeting, Hong Kong, February 10, 2019).Return to text 18. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC release results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program,"news release, May 7, 2009.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Thank you for that generous introduction. I have attended Economic Club of New York events many times over the years and have always enjoyed the programs that feature engaging speakers sharing important insights on timely topics. It is a distinct honor to appear before you today from this side of the podium, and I do hope my remarks will contribute to this proud tradition.1 In July, the current U.S. economic expansion will become the longest on record—or at least the record since the 1850s, which is as far back as the National Bureau of Economic Research tracks U.S. business cycles.2In anticipation of that milestone, I would like to take stock of where the U.S. economy is today, to assess its future trajectory, to review some important structural changes in the economy that have occurred over the past decade, and to explore what all of this might mean for U.S. monetary policy. The Federal Reserve has a specific mandate assigned to it in statute by the Congress, which is the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. As I speak today, the economy is as close to achieving both legs of this dual mandate as it has been in 20 years. My colleagues and I understand that our responsibility is to conduct a monetary policy that not only is supportive of and consistent withachievingmaximum employment and price stability, but also, once achieved, is appropriate, nimble, and consistent withsustainingmaximum employment and price stability for as long as possible. And thus, the title of my talk today is "Sustaining Maximum Employment and Price Stability." Midway through the second quarter of 2019, the U.S. economy is in a good place. Over the past four quarters, gross domestic product (GDP) growth has averaged 3.2 percent, which compares with an average growth rate of 2.3 percent since the recovery began in the summer of 2009. By most estimates, fiscal policy played an important role in boosting growth in 2018, and I expect that fiscal policies will continue to support growth in 2019. Over the same four quarters, the unemployment rate has averaged 3.8 percent, and the most recent reading, at 3.6 percent, is near its lowest level in 50 years. Moreover, average monthly job gains have continued to outpace the increases needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. Wages have been rising broadly in line with productivity and prices and thus, at present, do not signal rising cost-push pressure. Notwithstanding strong growth and low unemployment, U.S. inflation remains muted—currently, it is somewhat below our 2 percent longer-run objective for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price deflator—and inflation expectations, according to a variety of measures, continue to be stable. As we look ahead, in our March Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants was for GDP growth of around 2 percent as the modal, or most likely, outcome over the next three years, for PCE inflation to rise to 2 percent, and for the unemployment rate to edge up to 3.9 percent by 2021. Before I discuss the outlook for monetary policy, allow me to review some important structural changes that have taken place in the economy over the past decade that will be particularly relevant for our monetary policy decisions. Structural Changes in the U.S. Economy: Demand and SupplyPerhaps the most significant structural change relevant to monetary policy is that the real, or inflation-adjusted, rate of interest consistent with full employment and price stability, often referred to as the neutral rate, or r*, appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad from more than 2 percent before the crisis to less than 1 percent today.3The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, higher private saving, a greater demand for safe assets, and a slowdown in global productivity growth. The policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a lower neutral rate increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound in a future economic downturn. Such a development, in turn, could make it more difficult during a future downturn for monetary policy to provide sufficient accommodation to rapidly return employment and inflation to mandate-consistent levels.4 Another important potential change in the U.S. economy has been the steady decline in estimates of the structural rate of unemployment consistent with "maximum" employment, often referred to as u*. This decline in u* may be due in part to higher educational attainment and a larger proportion of older workers in the workforce today relative to the workforce of past decades.5If u* is lower than historical estimates suggest, this would imply that, even with today's historically low unemployment rate, the labor market would not be as tight—and inflationary pressures would not be as strong—as one would expect, based on historical estimates of u*. Indeed, I believe the range of plausible estimates for u* may extend to 4 percent or even below. I also note that the decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by a pronounced increase in labor force participation for individuals in their prime working years.6It has also been accompanied since 2014 by a rise in labor's share of national income. As I have documented previously, in the past several U.S. business cycles, labor's share has risen as those expansions proceeded because workers command higher wages in a stronger labor market; notably, in those cycles, the rise in labor's share did not pass through to faster price inflation.7The previously mentioned increase in prime-age labor force participation has provided employers with a source of additional labor input and has been one factor restraining inflationary pressures. Notwithstanding these recent gains, prime-age participation rates remain somewhat below levels achieved in the 1990s and may still have some more room to run. If so, then potential output could be higher than many current estimates suggest. Over the past few years, we have also seen evidence of a pickup in U.S. productivity growth, albeit from the very depressed average pace that prevailed throughout most of the expansion. Indeed, as of the first quarter of this year, productivity in the nonfarm business sector rose 2.4 percent over the previous four quarters, its fastest pace since 2010 when the U.S. economy was coming out of the Great Recession. By contrast, in both the 2001–07 and 1982–90 economic expansions, productivity growth was actually slowing relative to its average pace during those expansions. That said, while identifying inflection points in trend productivity growth in real time is notoriously difficult, a pickup in trend productivity growth relative to the pace that prevailed earlier in the expansion is a possibility that we should not, I believe, dismiss.8 Another structural change relevant for monetary policy is that price inflation appears less responsive to resource slack than it did in the past. That is, the short-run price Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.9A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.10However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.11 Textbook macroeconomics teaches us that understanding the economy and getting monetary policy right requires that we do our best to understand if—and if so, how—the forces of aggregate demand and supply are evolving relative to historical experience and the predictions of our models. While predicting the future is difficult, with available data it appears that in 2018 and in the first quarter of 2019, the supply side of the economy—employment, participation, and productivity—expanded faster than most forecasters outside and inside the Fed expected. Notwithstanding robust growth in demand over these five quarters, PCE price inflation fell somewhat short of the Fed's 2 percent objective. With this background, let me now turn to the outlook for U.S. monetary policy. Monetary PolicyAs I mentioned earlier, my colleagues and I on the FOMC understand that our priority today is to put in place policies that will helpsustainmaximum employment and price stability in an economy that appears to be operating close to both of our dual-mandate objectives. In our most recent statements, we have indicated that "the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the...federal funds rate may be appropriate to support" our dual-mandate objectives.12What does this mean in practice? To me, it means that we should allow the data on the U.S. economy to flow in and inform our future decisions. I believe that the path for the federal funds rate should be data dependent in two distinct ways.13Monetary policy should be data dependent in the sense that incoming data reveal at any point in time where the economy is relative to the ultimate objectives of price stability and maximum employment. This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into interest rate feedback rules. Data dependence in this sense is well understood, as it is of the type implied by a large family of policy rules, including Taylor-type rules, in which the parameters of the economy needed to formulate such rules are taken as known. But, of course, key parameters needed to formulate such rules, including u* and r*, are unknown. As a result, in the real world, monetary policy should be—and in the United States, I believe, is—data dependent in a second sense: Policymakers should and do study incoming data and use models to extract signals that enable them to update and improve estimates of r* and u*. Consistent with my earlier discussion, in the Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants have, over the past seven years, repeatedly revised down their estimates of both u* and r* as unemployment fell and real interest rates remained well below previous estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation those earlier estimates would have predicted. And these revisions to u* and r* appeared to have had an important influence on the path for the policy rate actually implemented in recent years. In addition to u* and r*, another important input into any monetary policy assessment is the state of inflation expectations. Indeed, I believe price stability requires that not only actual inflation be centered at our 2 percent objective, but also that expected inflation be equal to our 2 percent inflation objective. Unlike realized inflation, inflation expectations themselves are not directly observable; they must be inferred from econometric models, market prices, and surveys of households and firms. As I assess the totality of the evidence, I judge that, at present, indicators suggest that longer-term inflation expectations sit at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate. Where does this leave us today? As I already noted, the U.S. economy is in a very good place, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, inflationary pressures muted, expected inflation stable, and GDP growth solid and projected to remain so. Moreover, the federal funds rate is now in the range of estimates of its longer-run neutral level, and the unemployment rate is not far below many estimates of u*. Plugging these inputs into a 1993 Taylor-type rule produces a federal funds rate between 2.25 and 2.5 percent, which is the range for the policy rate that the FOMC has reaffirmed since our January meeting. Most recently, the Committee judged at our May meeting that the current stance of policy remains appropriate, and that decision reflects our view that some of the softness in recent inflation data will prove to be transitory. This judgment aligns with some private-sector forecasts, which now project PCE inflation to return to 2 percent by 2020. However, if the incoming data were to show a persistent shortfall in inflation below our 2 percent objective or were it to indicate that global economic and financial developments present a material downside risk to our baseline outlook, then these are developments that the Committee would take into account in assessing the appropriate stance for monetary policy. Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet​ DecisionsSince the beginning of the year, the FOMC has made several important decisions about how it will implement monetary policy and how it will conclude the process of normalizing the size of its balance sheet. These decisions have been made over several meetings and have been part of an ongoing process of the Committee's deliberations. Please allow me to summarize them now. The FOMC decided at its January meeting to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves—a regime often referred to as a floor system.14Such a system, which has been in place since late 2008, does not require the active management of reserves through daily open market operations. Instead, with an ample level of reserves in the banking system, the effective federal funds rate will settle at or slightly above the rate of interest paid on excess reserves (IOER).15This system has proven to be an efficient means of controlling the policy rate and effectively transmitting the stance of policy to a wide array of other money market instruments and to broader financial conditions. The FOMC continues to view the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting and communicating the stance of monetary policy, although in doing so, we must and do take into account how our balance sheet size, composition, and trajectory impact broader financial conditions. And as we stated in January, although adjustments in the target range for the federal funds rate are our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy, we are prepared to adjust the details of the plans for balance sheet normalization based on economic and financial developments. At its March meeting, the Committee announced that it would slow the pace of the runoff of the securities holdings in its SOMA portfolio, and that it plans to cease balance sheet runoff entirely by September.16Since starting the process of balance sheet normalization in 2017, the Federal Reserve's securities portfolio has shrunk by about $500 billion (roughly 2-1/2 percent of GDP) and the level of reserve balances has declined about $700 billion. Consistent with our decision in March, we began to slow the pace of runoff of our balance sheet earlier this month. When the process of normalizing the size of our balance sheet concludes in September, we expect that our reserves liabilities will, for a time, likely remain somewhat above the level necessary for an efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. If so, we plan after September to hold the size of our securities holdings constant for a while. During this period, reserve balances will continue to decline gradually as currency and other nonreserve liabilities increase. At the point that the Committee judges that reserve balances have declined to the level consistent with the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy, we plan to resume periodic open market operations to accommodate the normal trend growth in the demand for our liabilities.17 ​ As balance sheet normalization has progressed, the effective federal funds rate has firmed relative to the IOER rate. Last year, after the federal funds rate moved up closer to the top of the target range set by the FOMC, we made technical adjustments in our operations by lowering the IOER rate relative to the top of the target range by 5 basis points in June and then again in December to keep the federal funds rate well within its target range. At our May FOMC meeting, we made another technical adjustment in the IOER rate, reducing it by another 5 basis points to 2.35 percent. Since then, the effective federal funds rate has been trading close to the level where it began the year. Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and CommunicationsBefore I conclude my prepared remarks, allow me to say a few words about our review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.18While we believe that our existing approach to conducting monetary policy has served the public well, the purpose of this review is to evaluate and assess possible refinements that might help us best achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis. With the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. We want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. Furthermore, the shifts in r* and u*, as well as the flattening of the Phillips curve that I discussed earlier, suggest that the U.S. and foreign economies have evolved in significant ways relative to the pre-crisis experience. The Federal Reserve System is currently conducting "town hall"-styleFed Listensevents, in which we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics. In addition, we are holding a System research conference next week at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago that will feature speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. Building on both the perspectives we hear and staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year. We will share our conclusions with the public in the first half of 2020. The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to prejudge or predict our ultimate findings. What I can say is that any refinements or more-material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions. ReferencesAaronson, Daniel, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2015). "Changing Labor Force Composition and the Natural Rate of Unemployment," Chicago Fed Letter 338. Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Bank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report(PDF). Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July. ——— (2019a). "Statement regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization," press release, January 30. ——— (2019b). "Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, March 20. ——— (2019c). "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, May 1. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018). "The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Brynjolfsson, Erik, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (2019). "Artificial Intelligence and the Modern Productivity Paradox: A Clash of Expectations and Statistics (PDF)," in Ajay K. Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, eds.,The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 23–57; an earlier version is available athttps://www.nber.org/papers/w24001.pdf. Bullard, James (2018). "The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics(PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019). "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2014). "Share and Share Alike," Global Perspectives. New York: PIMCO, August. ——— (2016). "Good News for the Fed,"International Economy, Spring, pp. 44–45, 75–76. ——— (2018a). "Outlook for the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 25. ——— (2018b). "Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 3–56. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (S1, May), pp. S59–S75. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? (PDF)" inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79–95. Swanson, Eric T. (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Yellen, Janet (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Brian Doyle, David Lopez-Salido, and Bernd Schlusche for their assistance in preparing this speech.Return to text 2. See the NBER's "U.S. Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions" athttps://www.nber.org/cycles.html.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. More-educated workers and older workers both have lower structural unemployment rates, at least historically; see Aaronson, Hu, Seifoddini, and Sullivan (2015).Return to text 6. The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018, pp. 8–10).Return to text 7. For more on labor's share of national income and price inflation, see Clarida (2014, 2016).Return to text 8. For more on productivity growth, see Brynjolfsson, Rock, and Syverson (forthcoming).Return to text 9. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 10. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 11. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy, and see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) show that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 12. For example, see the May 2019 FOMC statement at Board of Governors (2019c), p.1.Return to text 13. For discussions on the federal funds rate and data dependency, see Clarida (2018a, 2018b).Return to text 14. For information on monetary policy implementation and balance sheet normalization, see Board of Governors (2019a).Return to text 15. The offered rate on the Overnight Reverse Repo Facility is an additional administered rate used to control the level of the federal fund rate.Return to text 16. Specifically, we slowed the balance sheet runoff in May by reducing the cap for monthly redemptions of Treasury securities from $30 billion to $15 billion; see Board of Governors (2019b).Return to text 17. In contrast to the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases conducted over recent years, these periodic technical open market operations would not have any implication for the stance of monetary policy; rather, such operations would be aimed at maintaining a level of reserve balances in the banking system consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation.Return to text 18. Additional information about the review, including background information on the initiative and a listing of events around the country, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "Certain Uncertainty: Tax Policy in Unsettled Times" National Tax Association 49th Annual Spring Symposium, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be here at the National Tax Association Annual Spring Symposium. Just as it may take the tax experts and practitioners here today some time to disentangle the longer-term implications of recent major changes to tax policy, so, too, we are in the process of analyzing the lessons for monetary policy of apparent post-crisis changes in the relationships among employment, inflation, and interest rates.1 The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve the job of using monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability. Price stability means moderate and stable inflation, which the Federal Reserve has defined to be 2 percent inflation. Maximum employment is understood as the highest level of employment consistent with price stability. In the aftermath of the Great Recession, which had deep and persistent effects, it is important to understand whether there have been long-lasting changes in the relationships among employment, inflation, and interest rates in order to ensure our policy framework remains effective. Employment and InflationThis expansion will soon become the longest on record in the United States. Growth has persisted throughout the past decade, overcoming downdrafts from abroad and pullbacks in fiscal support earlier in the expansion and benefiting last year from a large fiscal boost. Recent data confirm that consumers remain confident, workers are productive, and businesses are hiring, although trade conflict is creating uncertainty. The job market is strong. At 3.6 percent, the unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the crisis. At 80 percent, the employment rate for workers in their prime working-age years—a more comprehensive measure of slack that includes shifts in labor force participation as well as unemployment—has recently risen close to its pre-crisis level. In contrast, the picture on inflation is puzzling this far into an expansion. Despite the strengthening of the labor market, the measure of core inflation excluding volatile food and energy prices did not move up to 2 percent on a sustained basis until last year, and in the most recent reading, the 12-month change has moved down to 1.6 percent. Other inflation measures paint a somewhat more reassuring picture. The Dallas Fed's trimmed mean measure of inflation, which provides a different way to filter out idiosyncratic movements in various components of inflation, has increased 2 percent in the past 12 months, slightly higher than its level of 1.9 percent for the two previous years.2 The New NormalSince the Great Recession, there have been several changes in macroeconomic relationships, which I refer to as the new normal.3Now is a good time to assess the characteristics of the new normal and what they mean for monetary policy. The emerging contours of today's new normal are defined by low sensitivity of inflation to changes in labor market slack, a low long-term neutral rate of interest, and low underlying trend inflation. Let me take each in turn. In today's new normal, price inflation has not moved up consistently as the labor market has strengthened considerably over the course of the long expansion. This is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat: The historical relationship between resource slack and price inflation appears to have broken down.4Although wage growth has been moving progressively higher as labor market slack has diminished, broader price inflation has remained muted. Another important feature of today's new normal is that the long-run neutral interest rate seems to be lower than it was historically. The neutral rate of interest refers to the level of the federal funds rate that would maintain the economy at full employment and 2 percent inflation if no tailwinds or headwinds were buffeting the economy. The decline in the neutral rate likely reflects a variety of forces globally, such as the aging of the population in many large economies, some slowing in the rate of productivity growth, and increases in the demand for safe assets. When one looks at the Federal Reserve's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), it is striking that over the past five years, since the SEP interest rate projections first became available, the median estimate of the long-run federal funds rate has declined 1-1/2 percentage points, from 4‑1/4 percent to 2-3/4 percent. Going back further to the two decades before the crisis shows a similar decline in today's long-run neutral rate relative to earlier Blue Chip consensus forecasts of the long-run federal funds rate.5 Third, underlying trend inflation—the trend in inflation after filtering out idiosyncratic and transitory factors—appears to be somewhat below the Federal Reserve's goal of 2 percent. This raises the risk that households and businesses could come to expect inflation to run persistently below the Federal Reserve's target and could change their behavior in a way that reinforces that expectation. Expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation because wage and price behavior by businesses and households is partly based on expectations of future inflation. While low inflation and low interest rates have many benefits, the new normal presents a challenge for the conventional approach to monetary policy, in which the Federal Reserve could rely on changes in the level of the federal funds rate to achieve its inflation and employment goals. In past recessions, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates by 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household and business spending and hiring. With the long-run neutral rate low and with underlying trend inflation somewhat below target, nominal interest rates are likely to remain below those levels, which therefore leaves less room to cut rates as much as needed. With less room to ease financial conditions and support economic activity using our conventional policy tool, the economy may endure prolonged periods during and after recessions with short-term interest rates pinned at their effective lower bound. That, of course, was what happened following the financial crisis, when the Federal Reserve kept interest rates close to zero from December 2008 through November 2015. That constraint limits the Federal Reserve's ability to provide stimulus through its conventional tool and thus could tend to leave inflation lower than it would otherwise be, and unemployment higher. The experience of several years with the federal funds rate pinned at its effective lower bound and actual inflation below our target could weigh on expectations for future inflation and thereby influence the behavior of households and businesses that helps determine wages and prices. The experience of a sustained period of low inflation could depress underlying trend inflation by feeding into lower inflation expectations, further reducing nominal interest rates and the space to cut interest rates in what could become a downward spiral.6So we need to be especially careful to preserve as much of our conventional policy space as we can, while exploring mechanisms to augment the effectiveness of our framework.7 Maximum Employment in the New NormalThe new normal has some important benefits. With subdued inflation, the sustained expansion has drawn workers back into the labor market after a damaging recession. The unemployment rate is approaching a 50-year low, and the overall labor force participation rate has remained constant despite the long-term aging of the population that would otherwise be pushing participation lower. Like the overall unemployment rate, broader measures of labor market slack are also lower than their pre-crisis levels. The Bureau of Labor Statistics' U-6 measure shows that two groups have recently shrunk to pre-crisis levels after rising considerably during the recession: those working part time who would prefer full-time employment and people marginally attached to the labor force who have looked for work in the previous year but stopped looking more recently. The strong labor market is leading to employment gains among workers with disabilities. Research suggests it may be helping to narrow some of the long-standing disparities for some racial minorities, although this development is tentative and modest.8 We hear from business contacts that they are now hiring workers they may not previously have considered. During the recession, the evidence suggests that many employers raised their requirements for many job categories. As labor markets have tightened, employers in certain sectors, occupations, and areas of the country report they are loosening requirements and investing more in training. That means today's economy is providing opportunities for workers who might previously have been left on the sidelines—including those with records of past incarceration or who lack a particular certification or degree. Given that the large majority of working-age households, those at the middle and lower ends of the income distribution, rely primarily on wage income, advancing our employment mandate has served the country well. In today's new normal, with the low responsiveness of inflation to labor market tightness, there appears to be little evidence so far of a tradeoff with our price-stability objective. The sustained strengthening of the labor market also adds to the productive capacity of the economy by attracting people on the sidelines to join or rejoin the labor force and move into employment. What about the Risks?Of course, there are also risks. The past three downturns were precipitated not by rising inflation pressure, but rather by the buildup of financial imbalances. Extended periods of above-potential growth and low interest rates tend to be accompanied by rapid credit growth and elevated asset valuations, which tend to boost downside risks to the economy.9It is not hard to see why a high-pressure economy might be associated with elevated financial imbalances, especially late in the cycle. As an expansion continues, the memory of the previous recession fades. Profits tend to rise, experienced loss rates on loans are low, and people tend to project recent trends into the future, which leads financial market participants and borrowers to become overly optimistic. Risk appetite rises, asset valuations become stretched, and credit is available on easier terms and to riskier borrowers than earlier in the cycle when memories of losses were still fresh. Historically, when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise as the economy heated up, which naturally prompted the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates. In turn, the interest rate increases would have the collateral effect of damping increases in asset prices and risk appetites. With a flat Phillips curve, inflation does not rise as much as resource utilization tightens, and, accordingly, provides less necessity for the Federal Reserve to raise rates to restrictive levels. At the same time, low interest rates along with sustained strong economic conditions are conducive to increasing risk appetites prompting reach-for-yield behavior and boosting financial excesses late in an expansion. With the forces holding down interest rates likely to persist, valuation pressures and risky corporate debt, such as leveraged lending, could well remain at elevated levels. Elevated valuations and corporate debt could leave the economy more vulnerable to negative shocks. The market volatility in December is a reminder of how sensitive markets can be to downside surprises. A key implication of the weakening in the relationship between inflation and employment, then, is that we should not assume monetary policy will act to restrain the financial cycle as much as previously. As a consequence, policymakers may need to think differently about the interplay of the financial and business cycles due to the combination of a low neutral rate, a flat Phillips curve, and low underlying inflation. With financial stability risks likely to be more tightly linked to the business cycle than in the past, it may make sense to take actions other than tightening monetary policy to temper the financial cycle. In order to enable monetary policy to focus on supporting the return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent target on a sustained basis along with maximum employment, we should be looking to countercyclical tools to temper the financial cycle. One tool other central banks have been using to help temper the financial cycle is the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The CCyB provides regulators with the authority to require large banks to build up an extra capital buffer as financial risks mount.10Although the CCyB was authorized as part of the post-crisis package of reforms, so far, the Federal Reserve has chosen not to use it. Turning on the CCyB would build an extra layer of resilience and signal restraint, helping to damp the rising vulnerability of the overall system. Moreover, because the CCyB is explicitly countercyclical, it is intended to be cut if the outlook deteriorates, boosting the ability of banks to make loans when extending credit is most needed and providing a valuable signal about policymakers' intentions. This feature proved to be valuable in the United Kingdom in the wake of the Brexit referendum. If countercyclical tools and other regulatory safeguards are not adequate over the cycle, monetary policy will need to carry a greater burden in leaning against financial excesses. That would be unfortunate, because adding financial stability concerns to the burden of conventional monetary policy might undermine sustained achievement of our employment and inflation goals. Because the financial cycle is today likely to be tempered less than in the past by material increases in interest rates as the economy expands, the appropriate level of bank capital for today's conditions is unlikely to be the same as in past business cycles: Because interest rates likely will do less than in past cycles, regulatory buffers will need to do more. As a consequence, now is a bad time to be weakening the core resilience of our largest banking institutions or to be weakening oversight over the nonbank financial system. Instead, we should be safeguarding the capital and liquidity buffers of banks at the center of the system, carefully monitoring risks in the nonbank sector, and making good use of the countercyclical tool that we have. Achieving our Inflation Objective on a Sustained BasisFinally, let us turn to the apparent softness in underlying trend inflation. One hypothesis for the flat Phillips curve is that central banks have been so effective in anchoring inflation expectations that tightening resource utilization is no longer transmitted to price inflation.11Another possibility is that structural factors such as administrative changes to health care costs, globalization, or technological-enabled disruption have been dominant in recent years, masking the operation of cyclical forces.12Regardless, because inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, the Federal Reserve has the capacity and the responsibility to ensure inflation expectations are firmly anchored at—and not below—our target. As I have argued in the past, the fact that inflation has been running somewhat below our longer-run goal of 2 percent may not be entirely due to labor market slack or to transitory shocks; it also likely reflects some softening in inflation's underlying trend.13First, estimates of underlying inflation based on statistical filters are lower than they were before the financial crisis and are currently below 2 percent. Second, estimates of longer-run inflation expectations based on the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and on inflation compensation from financial market pricing are also running lower than before the financial crisis.14 Our goal now is to get underlying trend inflation around our target on a sustained basis. What would this take? We can get some sense from statistical models. Although there is no one widely agreed-upon method of measuring underlying inflation, one statistical approach that has received attention in recent years captures the idea that underlying inflation responds to the experience with actual inflation, and that this responsiveness varies over time.15We can use such an approach to get an idea of how much, and how quickly, underlying inflation might respond to any particular path for actual inflation. It provides some reassurance that our goal may be achievable if inflation moves only slightly above 2 percent for a couple of years. The SEP inflation projections of Committee members suggest that many have, over the past year or so, envisaged a few years of a mild overshoot.16 Of course, it is not entirely clear how to move underlying trend inflation smoothly to our target on a sustained basis in the presence of a very flat Phillips curve. One possibility we might refer to as "opportunistic reflation" would be to take advantage of a modest increase in actual inflation to demonstrate to the public our commitment to our inflation goal on a symmetric basis.17For example, suppose that an unexpected increase in core import price inflation drove overall inflation modestly above 2 percent for a couple of years. The Federal Reserve could use that opportunity to communicate that a mild overshooting of inflation is consistent with our goals and to align policy with that statement. Such an approach could help demonstrate to the public that the Committee is serious about achieving its 2 percent inflation objective on a sustained basis. ConclusionIn today's new normal, it is important to achieve inflation and inflation expectations around our 2 percent target on a sustained basis while guarding against financial imbalances through active use of countercyclical tools. We want to be mindful of the risk of financial imbalances that could amplify any shock and help tip the economy into recession, which the Federal Reserve has less conventional space to address in today's low interest rate environment. In my view, it is therefore wise to proceed cautiously, helping to sustain the expansion and further gains in employment and with appropriate regulatory safeguards that reduce the risk of dangerous financial imbalances. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For an assessment of the relative strengths of the ex-food-and-energy and trimmed mean measures of personal consumption expenditures inflation, see Jim Dolmas and Evan F. Koenig (2019),"Two Measures of Core Inflation: A Comparison," (PDF)Working Paper Series 1903 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, February).Return to text 3. See Lael Brainard (2016),"The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12.Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard (2015),"Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. October 12. For evidence that the Phillips curve may steepen when unemployment is low, see Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi (2019),"Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?"paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 22.Return to text 5. See Lael Brainard (2015),"Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low,"speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.Return to text 6. For a formal model of how this mechanism might work, see Michael T. Kiley and John M. Roberts (2017),"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–96. See also Thomas Mertens and John C. Williams (2019),"Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," (PDF)Staff Report 887 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May).Return to text 7. See Ben S. Bernanke (2017),"Monetary Policy in a New Era," (PDF)paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12–13. See also Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019),"Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).Return to text 8. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019),"Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.Return to text 9. SeeTobias Adrian, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone (2019),"Vulnerable Growth,"American Economic Review, vol.109(April), pp. 1263–89; and Michael T. Kiley (2018),"Unemployment Risk,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-067 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).Return to text 10. See Lael Brainard (2018),"Assessing Financial Stability over the Cycle,"speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, December 7.Return to text 11. For evidence that inflation expectations may have played a role in flattening the Phillips curve, see Damjan Pfajfar and John M. Roberts (2018),"The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text 12. For a discussion of cyclical and acyclical inflation, see Tim Mahedy and Adam Shapiro (2017),"What's Down with Inflation?" (PDF)FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-35 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November). For a specific discussion of the role of medical-care costs, see Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro (2016),"Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation," (PDF)FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May). For a discussion of common global factors, see Matteo Ciccarelli and Benoit Mojon (2010), "Global Inflation,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol.92 (August), pp. 524–35. For a discussion of the role of technology, see Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2018),"Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications for Business, Labor Markets and Monetary Policy,"conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, May 24–25.Return to text 13. See Lael Brainard (2017),"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate,"speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5; and Lael Brainard (2018),"Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds,"speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6.Return to text 14. The Michigan survey's measure of inflation expectations recently moved down to its all-time low.Return to text 15. For instance, see James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2007), "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 39 (February), pp. 3–33. Their model allows the responsiveness of underlying inflation to actual inflation to vary over time and suggests that responsiveness—the "gain"—has been lower in recent years than in the 1970s and 1980s.Return to text 16. See the Federal Open Market Committee's September 2018 SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the September 25–26, 2018, FOMC meeting, in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018),"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 25–26, 2018,"press release, October 17.Return to text 17. For discussions with respect todisinflation, see Antulio N. Bomfim and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2000), "Opportunistic and Deliberate Disinflation under Imperfect Credibility,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (pt. 1, November), pp. 707–21; and Athanasios Orphanides and David W. Wilcox (2002), "The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation,"International Finance,vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 47–71.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Fed Listens: A Capstone Roundtable" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York I am pleased to attend thisFed Listensevent providing the New York perspective for the Federal Reserve's review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1We are bringing open minds to our review and are seeking a broad range of perspectives. To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage with a wide range of interested individuals and groups as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2 Motivation for the ReviewThe Congress charged the Federal Reserve with achieving a dual mandate—maximum employment and price stability—and this review will take this mandate as given. We will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures is the operational goal most consistent with our price-stability mandate. While we believe that our existing strategy, tools, and communications practices have generally served the public well, we are eager to evaluate ways they might be improved. With the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time for this review. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. We want to ensure that we continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. In addition, we will evaluate the new policy tools and enhanced communication practices the Federal Reserve deployed in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession. Furthermore, the U.S. and foreign economies have evolved significantly since before the crisis. Perhaps most importantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3This global decline in neutral rates is widely expected to persist for years and likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth. These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support household spending, business investment, and employment and keep inflation from falling too low.4 Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5This change is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when inflation is less responsive to employment conditions.6However, that dynamic also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, it is all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 Finally, the strengthening of the labor market in recent years has highlighted the challenges of assessing the proximity of the labor market to the full employment leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. The unemployment rate, which stood at 3.6 percent in April, has been interpreted by many observers as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment. However, the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment is not directly observable and thus must be estimated. The range of plausible estimates likely extends at least as low as the current level of the unemployment rate. For example, in the March Blue Chip economic outlook survey, the average estimate of the natural rate of unemployment for the bottom 10 respondents was 3.9 percent, as compared with 4.7 percent for the highest 10 respondents.8 The decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by a pronounced increase in labor force participation for individuals in their prime working years.9These increases in participation have provided employers with a significant source of additional labor input and may be one factor restraining inflationary pressures. As with the unemployment rate, whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains uncertain. The strong job gains of recent years also has delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market. For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and there is some indication of an extra benefit to these groups as the unemployment rate moves into very low territory.11Likewise, although unemployment rates for less-educated workers are persistently higher than they are for their more-educated counterparts, these gaps appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12And wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13 Activities and Timeline for the ReviewOur monetary policy review will have several components.14The Board and the Reserve Banks are hostingFed Listensevents—such as this one in New York—in which we are hearing from, among others, business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics. Next month, we are holding a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. The program includes overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review. Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the Federal Open Market Committee will perform its own assessment of how it conducts monetary policy, beginning around the middle of the year. We expect to make our conclusions public in the first half of 2020. Concluding ThoughtsThe economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate finding. What I can say is that any changes to our conduct of monetary policy that we might make will be aimed solely at improving our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019)."Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7-8. Bank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report(PDF). Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015)."Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF)IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018a).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. -------- (2018b).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, July. -------- (2019).Monetary Policy Report.Washington: Board of Governors, February. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018)."The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy," (PDF)Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018)."The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve," (PDF)speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017)."Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF),report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019)."Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. Economic Policy Institute (2019).State of Working America Data Library. Washington: EPI, March. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018)."Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF),"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018)."Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic ActivityConference,Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–75. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017)."Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014)."Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," (PDF)NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017)."Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013)."The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF)inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79–95. Swanson, Eric T. (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Weingarden, Alison (2017)."Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities,"FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25. Yellen, Janet (2015)."Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. 1. Additional information aboutFed Listens,including background information on the initiative and a listing of events around the country, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. The apparent diminished responsiveness of inflation to resource slack is known in economic research as a flattening of the short-run Phillips curve. For evidence of this flattening in the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 8. The average estimate from the Blue Chip respondents was 4.3 percent. The box "How Tight Is the Labor Market?" in the Board's February 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of some indicators that can be used to assess labor market tightness; see Board of Governors (2018a, pp. 8-9).Return to text 9. The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018Monetary Policy Reportcontains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 8-10).Return to text 10. See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.Return to text 11. See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market. The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.Return to text 12. Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States. However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened. The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019Monetary Policy Reportexamines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp. 10-12). See also Weingarden (2017).Return to text 13. Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.Return to text 14. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text Fed ListensEvents
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "New England Perspectives on Fed Policymaking: A 'Fed Listens' Conference" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts I am pleased to attend thisFed Listensevent providing a New England perspective for the Federal Reserve's review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1We are bringing open minds to our review and are seeking a broad range of perspectives. To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage with a wide range of interested individuals and groups as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2 Motivation for the ReviewThe Congress charged the Federal Reserve with achieving a dual mandate—maximum employment and price stability—and this review will take this mandate as given. We will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures is the operational goal most consistent with our price-stability mandate. While we believe that our existing strategy, tools, and communications practices have generally served the public well, we are eager to evaluate ways they might be improved. That said, based on the experience of other central banks that have undertaken similar reviews, our review is more likely to produce evolution, not a revolution, in the way we conduct monetary policy. With the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time for this review. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. We want to ensure that we continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. In addition, we will evaluate the new policy tools and enhanced communication practices the Federal Reserve deployed in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession. Furthermore, the U.S. and foreign economies have evolved significantly since before the crisis. Perhaps most importantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3This global decline in neutral rates is widely expected to persist for years and likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth. These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support household spending, business investment, and employment and keep inflation from falling too low.4 Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5This change is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when inflation is less responsive to employment conditions.6However, that dynamic also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, it is all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 Activities and Timeline for the ReviewOur monetary policy review will have several components.8The Board and the Reserve Banks are hostingFed Listensevents—such as this one in Boston—in which we are hearing from, among others, business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics. Next month, we are holding a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. The program includes overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review. Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the Federal Open Market Committee will perform its own assessment of how it conducts monetary policy, beginning around the middle of the year. We expect to make our conclusions public in the first half of 2020. Concluding ThoughtsThe economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate finding. What I can say is that any changes to our conduct of monetary policy that we might make will be aimed solely at improving our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. ReferencesBank for International Settlements (2017).87th Annual Report (PDF). Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015)."Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF)IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018)."The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy,"Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018)."The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve,"speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics(PDF),report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019)."Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018)."Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018)."Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic ActivityConference,Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–75. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017)."Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (PDF), Spring, pp. 317–96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014)."Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," (PDF)NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017)."Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF)International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013)."The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF)inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79–95. Swanson, Eric T. (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Yellen, Janet (2015)."Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. 1. Additional information aboutFed Listens,including background information on the initiative and a listing of events around the country, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes.Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).Return to text 5. The apparent diminished responsiveness of inflation to resource slack is known in economic research as a flattening of the short-run Phillips curve. For evidence of this flattening in the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 8. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text Fed ListensEvents
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Fed Listens: Education, Employment, and Monetary Policy in the Third District" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania I am pleased to participate in this event, part of the listening tour that Reserve Banks are hosting around the country and a key input into the Federal Reserve's review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1We are bringing open minds to our review and are seeking a broad range of perspectives. To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage with a wide range of interested individuals and groups as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2 President Harker already mentioned the Federal Reserve's statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. Our review will take these dual mandate goals as given. We will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures is the operational goal most consistent with our price-stability mandate. While we believe that our existing strategy, tools, and communications practices have generally served the public well, we are eager to evaluate ways they might be improved. That said, based on the experience of other central banks that have undertaken similar reviews, our review is more likely to produce evolution, not a revolution, in the way we conduct monetary policy. With the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time for this review. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. We want to ensure that we continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. Furthermore, the U.S. and foreign economies have evolved significantly since before the Global Financial Crisis. The review will afford us the opportunity to evaluate the new policy tools and enhanced communication practices the Federal Reserve deployed in response to the crisis and the recession that followed it. Our monetary policy review will have several components. Listening sessions—such as today's—give us an opportunity to hear from the people and communities affected by monetary policy. Next month, we are holding a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with academic experts and panelists from outside the Fed. Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the Federal Open Market Committee will perform its own assessment of how it conducts monetary policy, beginning around the middle of the year. We expect to make our conclusions public in the first half of 2020. The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate findings. What I can say is that any changes to our conduct of monetary policy that we might make will be aimed solely at improving our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. 1. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes. See Jeffrey Fuhrer, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018),"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.Return to text Fed ListensEvents
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the 2019 Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference: "Renewing the Promise of the Middle Class," Washington, D.C. It is my pleasure to welcome all of you to the Federal Reserve System's 11th Community Development Research Conference, cosponsored by the community development offices of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. These biennial conferences are one manifestation of the Federal Reserve's deep commitment to supporting research that helps policymakers, community development practitioners, and researchers improve the economic well-being of families and communities. These gatherings also inform the Federal Reserve System's work in promoting consumer protection and community development, and I would like to thank all of you for your contributions to this conference. This year our conference focuses on pathways to the middle class. While there are many definitions of "middle class," I think we can agree that achieving a basic level of economic security is fundamental. Surveys suggest that many Americans believe being middle class means having a secure job and the ability to save.1In recent decades, income growth for middle-income households has lagged behind that for high‑income households.2In addition, economic resources differ markedly by race, education, occupation, geography, and other factors. Those circumstances underscore a two-fold challenge for our country: fostering the conditions that will help lower-income families reach the middle class, while ensuring that middle-class status still provides the basic economic security that it has traditionally offered. The conference organizers have sorted through the many research questions that will be addressed today and tomorrow and have taken away three key observations that are fundamental to addressing the challenges related to the middle class. The first observation is to note the long-term decline in relative income growth and upward economic mobility for those in the middle. According to a number of measures, income has grown more slowly for middle-class households since the 1970s than for those with higher incomes, resulting in wider income inequality. The kind of generational improvements in living standards that were long the hallmark of the American middle class have steadily diminished. In the 1950s, better than 80 percent of children born in middle-class households grew up to out-earn their parents, but more recently only around half do. One factor in this decline is the increase in income inequality I just noted, and another is slower productivity growth. This conference will touch on other possible reasons for this decline in upward mobility and relative income, such as changes in the prospects for career advancement that vary by occupation and location. The second observation is the widening gap in economic status and prospects between those with a college degree and those without one. In the 1960s, well over 90 percent of working-age men held a job, and there was very little difference in employment between those with or without a college degree. While the share of college-educated working-age men with a job has fallen from more than 95 percent in 1967 to around 90 percent in 2017, it has plunged for others. Ninety-five percent of male high school graduates were working in 1967, but only about 80 percent of them were working as of 2017. Among working-age men without a high school diploma, about 90 percent had a job in 1967 versus a bit more than 70 percent in 2017. For women of working age, the trends are less clear, but those without a college degree are also less likely to work today. Research presented this morning will discuss some possible explanations for the divergence in employment, income, and other economic prospects between college grads and others. The third observation is that the prospect of moving up the economic ladder depends on factors beyond effort and talent, including your family, the neighborhood you grow up in, and the quality of the primary and secondary schools you attend. Your chances for attending college are much better if you are raised in a higher-income household, and that advantage has increased substantially since the 1980s. Another factor is geography. Some research indicates that economic prospects are better for those who grow up in neighborhoods with less income inequality, less concentrated poverty, and better performing schools. Finally, across so many dimensions, we continue to see disparities in economic outcomes by race and ethnicity. These issues are crucial. Sound public policies can support families and businesses and help more Americans reach and remain in the middle class. I look forward to hearing about your discussions over the next two days, and thank you, again, for your contributions. 1. See Pew Research Center (2016), "What Americans Say It Takes to Be Middle Class," Fact Tank (Washington: PRC, May 6).Return to text 2. See Congressional Budget Office (2018),The Distribution of National Income, 2015(PDF)(Washington: CBO, November).Return to text