WASHINGTON, D.C. – The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the Federal Reserve Board today jointly published amendments to Regulation CC that implement a statutory requirement to adjust for inflation the amount of funds depository institutions must make available to their customers. The amendments apply in circumstances ranging from next business day withdrawal of certain check deposits to setting the threshold amount for determining whether an account has been repeatedly withdrawn. Regulation CC implements the Expedited Funds Availability Act of 1987 (EFA Act). The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amended the EFA Act to grant the Bureau and the Board joint rulemaking authority for funds-availability schedules, disclosure policies, payment of interest, and other EFA Act provisions implemented by Regulation CC. The Dodd-Frank Act amendments require that the EFA Act's dollar amounts be inflation adjusted every five years by the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). The first set of adjustments are detailed in the attachedFederal Registernotice. To help ensure that institutions have sufficient time to implement the adjustments, the compliance date for the adjusted amounts is July 1, 2020. The agencies are also implementing in Regulation CC the EFA Act amendments made by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, which include extending coverage of the EFA Act to American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and Guam. Federal Registernotice (PDF)
The three federal bank regulatory agencies adopted a final rule to streamline regulatory reporting requirements for small institutions. The final rule implements Section 205 of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act and is one step in the agencies' efforts to meaningfully streamline reporting requirements. The agencies are committed to actively exploring additional revisions to Call Reports that would further reduce reporting requirement burdens. The changes announced today would permit insured depository institutions with total assets of less than $5 billion that do not engage in certain complex or international activities to file the most streamlined version of the Call Report, the FFIEC 051 Call Report. The rule would reduce by approximately one-third the number of existing data items reportable for the first and third calendar quarters. All institutions, regardless of size, submit a quarterly Call Report that includes data used by regulators to monitor the condition, performance, and risk profile of individual institutions and the industry as a whole. Federal Registernotice (PDF)
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced the availability of the 2019 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies, where revitalization or stabilization activities are eligible to receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration under the community development definition. Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies and underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria for designating these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) website (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). The designations continue to reflect local economic conditions, including unemployment, poverty, and population changes. As with past releases, the agencies apply a one-year lag period for geographies that were listed in 2018 but are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current release. Revitalization or stabilization activities in these geographies are eligible to receive CRA consideration under the community development definition for 12 months after publication of the current list. The current and previous years' lists can be found on the FFIEC website, along with information about the data sources used to generate those lists. 2019 List of Distressed or Underserved Nonmetropolitan Middle-Income Geographies (PDF) Source Information and Methodology (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the Committee, it has been just over a year since this Committee first recommended my nomination as a Federal Reserve Board Governor. While I am not the first community banker to serve on the Board, I am humbled by the opportunity you gave me to serve as the first Governor to fill the role the Congress designated for someone with community banking experience on the Federal Reserve Board. I am deeply honored the President has renominated me to serve in that capacity. I am also grateful to my family for their continued support. My husband, Wes, and our children, Jack and Audrey, are here with me today. The rest of my family are watching from home in Kansas. Since my confirmation last year, I have worked to fulfill my unique role on the Board by traveling widely and listening closely to community bankers, consumers, small business owners, and community leaders. I have visited with farmers, workers, and business leaders from across the country to discuss the economy. I am making sure these unique perspectives are represented in the Federal Reserve's deliberations and decision making on both monetary policy and regulatory matters. During my time at the Board, I have also drawn on my experience as a community banker and regulator to ensure that our work is guided by a deep understanding of the practical realities confronting bankers and the communities they serve across the country. The work done after the crisis to address the weaknesses in the U.S. financial system and ensure its future resilience was essential. However, during my time at my family's community bank, I saw firsthand how the regulatory changes created in the aftermath of the crisis impacted community financial institutions. Small, solid institutions like this one are essential to so many of our citizens and communities. As regulators, we need to ensure that we are not imposing unnecessary burdens on community banks. That is why one of my priorities as a Governor has been to appropriately tailor our supervision and regulation to the size, complexity, capacity, and risks posed by an institution. To further this effort, I recently formed a working group of experts from across the Federal Reserve System to launch a comprehensive review of our supervisory work with smaller regional and community banks. While serving as the Kansas State Bank Commissioner, I was committed to treating every consumer and institution fairly and respectfully and fostering open communication. This working group will follow those same principles. We are looking for ways to optimize our supervision and regulation to ensure it adapts to the on-the-ground realities of an evolving industry and changing consumer expectations while maintaining the safety and soundness of our banking system. Let me close by saying a few words about monetary policy and the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. As a community banker, it was my job to support local businesses and consumers. I draw upon this experience often when thinking about monetary policy, because it has given me a personal and practical understanding of how the Federal Reserve's goals of fostering maximum employment and stable prices directly affects individuals as well as the broader financial system and economy. The Congress has given the Federal Reserve independence to pursue these goals, because our work is critical to our economy, to businesses, to families, and to communities. I am deeply committed to fulfilling this mandate. If confirmed by the Senate, I will continue the important work I have begun and be committed to accountability, transparency, and clear communication in all of my responsibilities at the Federal Reserve. Thank you for the honor of this hearing, and I look forward to answering the Committee's questions.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to speak at the Council on Foreign Relations. I will begin with a progress report on the broad public review my Federal Reserve colleagues and I are conducting of the strategy, tools, and communication practices we use to achieve the objectives Congress has assigned to us by law—maximum employment and price stability, or the dual mandate. Then I will discuss the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy. I look forward to the discussion that will follow. During our public review, we are seeking perspectives from people across the nation, and we are doing so through open public meetings live-streamed on the internet. Let me share some of the thinking behind this review, which is the first of its nature we have undertaken. The Fed is insulated from short-term political pressures—what is often referred to as our "independence." Congress chose to insulate the Fed this way because it had seen the damage that often arises when policy bends to short-term political interests. Central banks in major democracies around the world have similar independence. Along with this independence comes the obligation to explain clearly what we are doing and why we are doing it, so that the public and their elected representatives in Congress can hold us accountable. But real accountability demands more of us than clear explanation: We must listen. We must actively engage those we serve to understand how we can more effectively and faithfully use the powers they have entrusted to us. That is why we are formally and publicly opening our decisionmaking to suggestions, scrutiny, and critique. With unemployment low, the economy growing, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective, this is a good time to undertake such a review. Another factor motivating the review is that the challenges of monetary policymaking have changed in a fundamental way in recent years. Interest rates are lower than in the past, and likely to remain so. The persistence of lower rates means that, when the economy turns down, interest rates will more likely fall close to zero—their effective lower bound (ELB). Proximity to the ELB poses new problems to central banks and calls for new ideas. We hope to benefit from the best thinking on these issues. At the heart of the review are ourFed Listensevents, which include town hall–style meetings in all 12 Federal Reserve Districts. These meetings bring together people with wide-ranging perspectives, interests, and expertise. We also want to benefit from the insights of leading economic researchers. We recently held a conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago that combined research presentations by top scholars with roundtable discussions among leaders of organizations that serve union workers, low- and moderate-income communities, small businesses, and people struggling to find work. We have been listening. What have we heard? Scholars at the Chicago event offered a range of views on how well our monetary policy tools have effectively promoted our dual mandate. We learned more about cutting-edge ways to measure job market conditions. We heard the latest perspectives on what financial and trade links with the rest of the world mean for the conduct of monetary policy. We heard scholarly views on the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. And we heard a review of the clarity and the efficacy of our communications. Like many others at the conference, I was particularly struck by two panels that included people who work every day in low- and middle-income communities. What we heard, loud and clear, was that today's tight labor markets mean that the benefits of this long recovery are now reaching these communities to a degree that has not been felt for many years. We heard of companies, communities, and schools working together to bring employers the productive workers they need—and of employers working creatively to structure jobs so that employees can do their jobs while coping with the demands of family and life beyond the workplace. We heard that many people who, in the past, struggled to stay in the workforce are now getting an opportunity to add new and better chapters to their life stories. All of this underscores how important it is to sustain this expansion. The conference generated vibrant discussions. We heard that we are doing many things well, that we have much we can improve, and that there are different views about which is which. That disagreement is neither surprising nor unwelcome. The questions we are confronting about monetary policymaking and communication, particularly those relating to the ELB, are difficult ones that have grown in urgency over the past two decades. That is why it is so important that we actively seek opinions, ideas, and critiques from people throughout the economy to refine our understanding of how best to use the monetary policy powers Congress has granted us. Beginning soon, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will devote time at its regular meetings to assess the lessons from these events, supported by analysis by staff from around the Federal Reserve System. We will publicly report the conclusions of our discussions, likely during the first half of next year. In the meantime, anyone who is interested in learning more can find information on the Federal Reserve Board's website.1 Let me turn now from the longer-term issues that are the focus of the review to the nearer-term outlook for the economy and for monetary policy. So far this year, the economy has performed reasonably well. Solid fundamentals are supporting continued growth and strong job creation, keeping the unemployment rate near historic lows. Although inflation has been running somewhat below our symmetric 2 percent objective, we have expected it to pick up, supported by solid growth and a strong job market. Along with this favorable picture, we have been mindful of some ongoing crosscurrents, including trade developments and concerns about global growth. When the FOMC met at the start of May, tentative evidence suggested these crosscurrents were moderating, and we saw no strong case for adjusting our policy rate. Since then, the picture has changed. The crosscurrents have reemerged, with apparent progress on trade turning to greater uncertainty and with incoming data raising renewed concerns about the strength of the global economy. Our contacts in business and agriculture report heightened concerns over trade developments. These concerns may have contributed to the drop in business confidence in some recent surveys and may be starting to show through to incoming data. For example, the limited available evidence we have suggests that investment by businesses has slowed from the pace earlier in the year. Against the backdrop of heightened uncertainties, the baseline outlook of my FOMC colleagues, like that of many other forecasters, remains favorable, with unemployment remaining near historic lows. Inflation is expected to return to 2 percent over time, but at a somewhat slower pace than we foresaw earlier in the year. However, the risks to this favorable baseline outlook appear to have grown. Last week, my FOMC colleagues and I held our regular meeting to assess the stance of monetary policy. We did not change the setting for our main policy tool, the target range for the federal funds rate, but we did make significant changes in our policy statement. Since the beginning of the year, we had been taking a patient stance toward assessing the need for any policy change. We now state that the Committee will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. The question my colleagues and I are grappling with is whether these uncertainties will continue to weigh on the outlook and thus call for additional policy accommodation. Many FOMC participants judge that the case for somewhat more accommodative policy has strengthened. But we are also mindful that monetary policy should not overreact to any individual data point or short-term swing in sentiment. Doing so would risk adding even more uncertainty to the outlook. We will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion. 1. More onFed Listensevents and related information is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At Policy Summit 2019: Connecting People and Places to Opportunity, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cincinnati, Ohio It is good to be here in Cincinnati. I want to thank my colleague, Loretta Mester, for inviting me to participate today, and it is a pleasure to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Policy Summit.1 Today's session is part of a series calledFed Listens.The Federal Reserve is reaching out to communities around the country to hear how Americans are experiencing the economy day to day and to make sure we are carrying out the monetary policy goals assigned to us by the Congress in the most effective way we can.2 The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability. These two goals are what we refer to as our dual mandate. By price stability, we mean moderate and stable inflation. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the group at the Fed responsible for determining monetary policy—has announced that our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent over time. The maximum-employment part of our dual mandate means that the Congress has directed us to achieve the highest level of employment that is consistent with price stability. The OutlookEarlier this week, President Mester and I participated in the meeting of the FOMC, where we had the opportunity to share our views on the economy and policy. My own assessment is that the most likely path for the economy remains solid. The latest data suggest that consumer spending is robust, and consumer confidence is high. Although the pace of payroll gains has moderated recently, unemployment is at a 50-year low, wages are growing, participation in the labor force has expanded, and unemployment insurance claims are at cycle lows. Despite recent volatility, financial conditions overall remain supportive. Recent weeks, however, have seen important downside risks. Crosscurrents from policy uncertainty have risen since early May, crimping business investment plans, raising concerns in some financial market segments, and weighing on global growth prospects. Foreign authorities are seeking additional policy space to address growth and inflation shortfalls. In addition, recent indicators of inflation and inflation expectations have been disappointing, making it all the more important to sustain the economy's momentum. The downside risks, if they materialize, could weigh on economic activity. Basic principles of risk management in a low neutral rate environment with compressed conventional policy space would argue for softening the expected path of policy when risks shift to the downside.3 Our ReviewWith recent indicators suggesting the expansion is continuing at a solid pace and unemployment at a 50-year low, inflation has not yet moved to our goal on a sustained basis. In many ways, that can be viewed as an opportunity, with the sustained expansion providing critical job opportunities to a broader set of applicants. In parallel, it is also vital that a central bank meets its inflation target on a sustained basis, which will provide more capacity to buffer the economy if it encounters headwinds. We are undertaking our review to ensure we are well positioned to meet our goals for many years to come, especially in light of the way the economy is changing, which I have been referring to as the "new normal."4There are a few key features of that new normal. First, interest rates have stayed very low in recent years in the United States and in many other advanced economies, and it seems likely that equilibrium interest rates will remain low in the future. Low interest rates present a challenge for traditional monetary policy in recessions. In the past, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household spending and business investment. However, when equilibrium interest rates are low, we have less room to cut interest rates and less room to buffer the economy using our conventional tool. Another big change in the economy is that inflation does not move as much with economic activity and employment as it has in the past, which is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat. A flat Phillips curve has important advantages: The labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers who may have been sidelined back into productive employment without an acceleration in inflation, unlike what we saw in the 1960s and 1970s. On the other hand, today's low sensitivity of inflation to slack, along with the limited ability to cut interest rates in a recession, means it can be more difficult to achieve our 2 percent inflation objective on a sustainable basis. The limited ability to cut interest rates could provide less ability to buffer the economy in a downturn, while the very flat Phillips curve could make it harder to boost inflation during an expansion. And that could further compress policy space in a negative spiral. As we have seen in other countries, if inflation consistently falls short of the central bank's objective, consumers, workers, and businesses start to expect lower inflation to continue. Expectations of low inflation can create a self-fulfilling dynamic with actual inflation, making it even more difficult for the central bank to boost inflation. And because inflation is reflected in nominal interest rates, that, in turn, can reduce the amount of policy space the central bank has available to prevent the economy from slipping into recession. In fact, in recent years, central banks around the world have had to use a larger variety of policy tools than they have traditionally used to support the recovery. Some Issues to ExploreGiven the new normal of low equilibrium interest rates and low sensitivity of inflation to slack, it is prudent to assess how well various approaches worked both here and around the world, with a view to identifying the best ways to promote the goals the Congress assigned to us. Earlier this month, we held a conference in Chicago where we heard from experts as well as community organizations, small businesses, labor organizations, and retirees. We are looking at our tools and strategies, assessing not just the various approaches that were undertaken, but also approaches that have been proposed but not tried. One of the ideas discussed in Chicago is that the Federal Reserve should explicitly promise to "make up" for misses on inflation during a downturn. The Federal Reserve could hold interest rates lower after a recession is over, perhaps by promising not to raise interest rates until inflation or the unemployment rate have reached particular levels.5A related idea discussed in Chicago is average inflation targeting, meaning the Federal Reserve would aim to achieve its inflation objective, on average, over a longer period of time—perhaps over the business cycle.6This approach could also have aspects of a makeup policy, depending on how it is designed. While such approaches sound quite appealing on their face, they have not yet been implemented in practice. There is some skepticism that a central bank would in fact prove able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that inflation might accelerate, and inflation expectations might rise too high. At the Chicago conference, we also heard how difficult it can be to estimate with any precision the "maximum employment" leg of our dual mandate.7There is no fixed destination point for maximum employment—no single number where we can be sure we are "there." Maximum employment is something that we must learn about by seeing how the job market is operating. That is very different from the longer-run level of inflation, which central banks are presumed able to determine over time. At our conference in Chicago, we also asked the panelists about our communications with the public, and the responses were humbling. The Federal Reserve communicates with the public about monetary policy through a variety of channels. At each of our policy-setting meetings, the FOMC issues a statement, and Chair Jerome Powell holds a press conference. Three weeks after the meeting, the minutes of the meeting are published. Twice a year, the Federal Reserve submits aMonetary Policy Reportto the Congress. We heard in Chicago that most members of the public care a lot about the job market and the cost of credit, but they are not aware of our communications about monetary policy.8Of course, the media plays an important role in communicating our monetary policy actions and how they affect the economy. And the Congress, which plays an important role in overseeing the Fed, is a key audience as well. Nonetheless, considering how we can provide greater visibility to the public about what we do will be one of the issues we will be considering as our policy review continues. ListeningNow, how does today's event fit into all of this? Since I arrived at the Fed, I have derived tremendous benefit from visiting communities all over the country to hear from them how they are experiencing the economy. Today President Mester and I want to hear from you. How is your community experiencing today's economy? Is everyone who wants a job able to get one? Can they get the necessary training? Are businesses finding it relatively easy to hire the workers they need? How does price inflation and wage growth affect you? What about the availability and cost of credit—whether to start or expand a small business, buy a car to get to work, or invest in owning a home or getting a degree? And are there ways we can better communicate with you? I look forward to hearing your views on these and other questions. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Richard H. Clarida (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 22; and Jerome H. Powell (2019), "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," speech delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 8.Return to text 3. One reason for caution is the risk of building financial market imbalances, such as currently elevated levels of risky corporate debt. In my view, it is better to address such financial imbalances by activation of our countercyclical capital buffer, rigorous use of stress tests, and beefed-up monitoring of leveraged lending than by monetary policy.Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard (2016), "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, September 12.Return to text 5. See Sharon Kozicki (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve: Discussion of Practical Considerations (PDF)," presentation at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.Return to text 6. See Lars E.O. Svensson (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF)," paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.Return to text 7. See Katharine G. Abraham and John C. Haltiwanger (2019), "How Tight is the Labor Market? (PDF)" paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategies, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Panel 1: What Does Full Employment Look Like for Your Community or Constituency?" at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Panel 2: Transmission of Monetary Policy to the Economy: Beyond the Headlines," at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.Return to text
The attached table and charts released on Wednesday summarize the economic projections and the target federal funds rate projections made by Federal Open Market Committee participants for the June 18-19 meeting. The table will be incorporated into a summary of economic projections released with the minutes of the June 18-19 meeting. Summaries of economic projections are released quarterly. Projections (PDF)|Accessible Materials For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Ameris Bancorp, Moultrie, Georgia, to merge with Fidelity Southern Corporation ("FSC") and thereby indirectly acquire FSC's subsidiary state nonmember bank, Fidelity Bank, both of Atlanta, Georgia. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the applications under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Frost Bank, San Antonio, Texas, to establish ten branches in Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the proposal under section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Texas Independent Bancshares, Inc. ("TIB"), Texas City, Texas, to acquire Preferred Bancshares, Inc. ("Preferred") and thereby indirectly acquire Preferred's subsidiary federal savings bank, Preferred Bank, both of Houston, Texas. The Board also approved the proposals under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Texas First Bank, Texas City, Texas, to merge with Preferred Bank and to establish and operate branches at the locations of the main office and branches of Preferred Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of an enforcement action against JPMorgan Chase & Co. from January 2013. The enforcement action identified deficiencies in the firm's internal controls, particularly at the firm's Chief Investment Office (CIO), following the disclosure of significant losses in a large synthetic credit portfolio managed by the CIO. The enforcement action required the firm to improve its risk-management program and internal audit functions and was terminated based on evidence of substantial improvements by the firm. The enforcement action from January 2013 can be foundhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent cease and desist order against Youlei Tang, former employee of Goldman Sachs & Co., New York, New York, for mishandling confidential supervisory information and proprietary information. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday published, "Perspectives from Main Street: Stakeholder Feedback on Modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act," a summary of feedback received from bankers and community groups during a series of 29 roundtable discussions on the current state of, and potential revisions to, the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The information was gathered from CRA roundtables hosted by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Banks held between October 2018 and January 2019. More than 400 participants shared views that will factor into the Board's consideration of any CRA modernization proposals. Additionally, representatives from the other federal banking agencies with CRA responsibility were invited to attend the roundtables. "Meeting with bankers and community group members in communities all around the country allowed us to hear nuanced perspectives about what works well and what could work better under the CRA," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. Enacted in 1977, the CRA affirmed the obligation of federally insured depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of communities in which they are chartered, consistent with safe and sound operations. The act also charged the federal bank regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, with implementing the CRA through issuing regulations and evaluating banks' performance to determine whether they meet their CRA obligations. "Perspectives from Main Street: Stakeholder Feedback on Modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act" may be accessed at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/stakeholder-feedback-on-modernizing-the-community-reinvestment-act.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Perspectives from Main Street: Stakeholder Feedback on Modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act(PDF)
The nation's largest and most complex banks have strong capital levels that would allow them to stay well above their minimum requirements after being tested against a severe hypothetical recession, according to the results of supervisory stress tests released Friday by the Federal Reserve Board. The most severe hypothetical scenario projects $410 billion in total losses for the 18 participating bank holding companies. This scenario featured a global recession with the U.S. unemployment rate rising by more than 6 percentage points to 10 percent, accompanied by a large decline in real estate prices and elevated stress in corporate loan markets. The firms' aggregate common equity tier 1 capital ratio, which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets, would fall from an actual level of 12.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2018 to a minimum level of 9.2 percent. Since 2009, the common equity capital at the 18 firms has increased by more than $680 billion. "The results confirm that our financial system remains resilient," Vice Chairman Randal K. Quarles said. "The nation's largest banks are significantly stronger than before the crisis and would be well-positioned to support the economy even after a severe shock." Loan losses in this year's stress test are broadly comparable to those from past years. Credit card loans showed the highest losses, followed by commercial and industrial loans. Capital is critical to banking organizations, the financial system, and the economy, because it acts as a cushion to absorb losses and helps to ensure that losses are borne by shareholders. The Board uses its own independent projections of losses and incomes for each firm and the results are not forecasts or expected outcomes. Only the largest and most complex banks were tested this year. As previously announced, smaller and less complex banks were not tested this year and are currently on a two-year cycle, consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. The firms tested this year represent about 70 percent of the assets of all banks operating in the U.S. Friday's stress tests are one component of the Federal Reserve's analysis during its annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which assesses the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of large bank holding companies and includes an evaluation of their planned capital distributions, such as dividend payments and share repurchases. CCAR results will be released on Thursday, June 27, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2019: Supervisory Stress Test Results (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested public comment on technical, clarifying updates regarding its Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) procedures and changes to improve the efficiency of its rules governing the disclosure of confidential supervisory information (CSI). The proposal would update the Board's FOIA regulation to be consistent with the Board's current practices and to incorporate recent changes in law and guidance. Some of these changes include updating definitions for expedited processing and the different categories of requesters. The revisions would also clarify terms and help users more easily navigate the process of filing a FOIA request. The proposed changes to the CSI rules would ease certain outdated and inefficient restrictions. The proposal would, among other things, expand the ability of a supervised financial institution to share CSI with its affiliates, auditors, and outside legal counsel as well as other federal and state banking agencies. The revision to the definition of CSI is for clarification purposes and would not expand or reduce the information that falls within the definition. Comments are due within 60 days of publication in the Federal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal RegisternoticeHTML
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in May indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity is rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although growth of household spending appears to have picked up from earlier in the year, indicators of business fixed investment have been soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook have increased. In light of these uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; Richard H. Clarida; Charles L. Evans; Esther L. George; Randal K. Quarles; and Eric S. Rosengren. Voting against the action was James Bullard, who preferred at this meeting to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Implementation Note issued June 19, 2019
The nation's largest banks have strong capital levels and virtually all are now meeting supervisory expectations for capital planning, the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced following its annual examination. As a result, the Board is not objecting to the capital plans of all 18 firms but is requiring one firm to address limited weaknesses identified from the test. The Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR, evaluated the capital planning processes and capital adequacy of 18 of the largest banking firms, including the firms' planned capital actions, such as dividend payments and share buybacks. Strong capital levels act as a cushion to absorb losses and help ensure that banking organizations have the ability to lend to households and businesses even in times of stress. "The stress tests have confirmed that the largest banks are both well capitalized and place a high priority on strong capital planning practices," said Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles. "The results show that these firms and our financial system are resilient in normal times and under stress." The Board considers both quantitative and qualitative factors when evaluating a bank's capital plan. Quantitative factors include a bank's projected capital ratio under a hypothetical severe recession. Qualitative factors include the firm's capital planning process, including its risk management, internal controls, and governance practices. The Board can object to the capital plans of all banks in CCAR each year on quantitative grounds, and firms that have been in CCAR for less than four years are also subject to an objection on qualitative grounds. If the Board objects to a firm's capital plan, the bank cannot make any capital action unless authorized by the Board. The Board did not object to the capital plan from the U.S. holding company of Credit Suisse, but is requiring the firm to address certain limited weaknesses in its capital planning processes. The Federal Reserve did not object to the capital plans of the remaining 17 firms. On balance, virtually all firms are now meeting the Federal Reserve's capital planning expectations, which is an improvement from last year's assessment. The firms in the test have significantly increased their capital since the first round of stress tests in 2009. In particular, the largest and most complex banks have more than doubled their common equity capital from around $300 billion to roughly $800 billion during that time. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2019: Assessment Framework and Results (PDF) Board Votes
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2019 Interagency Minority Depository Institution and CDFI Bank Conference, Arlington, Virginia Thank you, Makada. Good morning and let me also welcome everyone to the Seidman Center. I am very pleased to join you today for this discussion, which highlights the important role that minority depository institutions (MDIs) and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) play in their communities. It is your presence in these communities and the services you offer that support local businesses, jobs, and economic growth. I know this because before joining the Federal Reserve, I was a community banker in a small rural town and more recently served as Kansas' State Bank Commissioner. I understand what it means to try to meet the financial needs of a community, whose needs are varied and can present unique challenges to a credit underwriter. I remember working with a customer on a mortgage loan for less than $20,000 with a first-time homebuyer's credit to purchase a mobile home. It was one of the most complicated and time consuming loans that I made during my time as a banker. Some larger banks might not be able or even be interested in putting that together, but community bankers know how important this kind of service is to their lower-income customers. I'm proud to bring that perspective to the Federal Reserve Board as the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience. One way to fulfill my responsibilities is by meeting with and listening closely to minority and community bankers, consumers, small business owners, and local leaders—all of the stakeholders with an interest in their communities. MDIs and their staff play a key role, and I will use the knowledge we gain from these interactions to improve our work at the Federal Reserve. We aim to help MDIs in three ways: by finding ways to ease your regulatory burden, by sponsoring valuable and actionable research on your contributions to your communities, and by seeking to better support you through outreach and hands-on technical assistance. To achieve these goals, the Fed has developed an extensive outreach program, the Partnership for Progress (PFP). The PFP helps MDIs confront business model challenges, cultivate safe banking practices, and compete more effectively in the marketplace—all topics that I expect will be addressed today. Regulatory BurdenOne of the most important ways to help MDIs is by reducing regulatory burden. We are acting to implement provisions of a new law, S-2155, and reviewing comments on several proposals made in 2018 to ensure they do not unduly burden community banks. Our community bank leverage ratio proposal would allow qualifying banks to opt out of a more complicated risk-based capital framework. Other proposals include raising to $400,000 the threshold for when an appraisal is required for a residential real estate transaction and narrowing the Volcker rule to banks engaged in riskier activities. We raised the threshold from $1 billion to $3 billion in assets for banks that could qualify for an 18-month examination cycle. Further, we raised the asset threshold to $3 billion for the Small Bank Holding Company and Savings and Loan Holding Company Policy Statement. This change, which exempts small holding companies from consolidated risk-based capital rules, fosters local ownership of small banks by allowing more banking companies with limited access to capital markets to use debt in bank acquisitions. With respect to supervision, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor and reduce burden by conducting portions of examinations offsite for community banks that prefer that option. The Bank Exams Tailored to Risk (BETR) program identifies low-risk or, conversely, high-risk activities within state member banks and appropriately streamlines or expands examination work programs commensurate with the identified risk. This minimizes the burden for banks that are well managed and directs supervisory resources to higher-risk activities where they are most needed. Related to regulatory burden is an important initiative, in concert with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to identify healthy minority banking organizations capable of acquiring or merging with MDIs in troubled condition. Our PFP team has assisted with the process for establishing new MDIs and worked with MDIs to identify advantageous federally sponsored programs with which to collaborate. I note that today's agenda includes a session on this topic. ResearchThe Board and Reserve Banks also conduct valuable research on the impact of MDIs on underserved households and communities. Last November, we held a webinar, which I hope some of you were able to participate in, on recent research on MDIs. All of our MDI research is available on the Partnership for Progress website. The PFP continues to seek to sponsor high-quality research to enhance our understanding of the MDI business model and how MDIs serve their communities. We welcome your input on research topics you find interesting and helpful. Tech Assistance/OutreachThrough this biennial conference and several PFP conferences and outreach events each year, the Federal Reserve facilitates networking among MDI institutions. District coordinators from each Federal Reserve Bank will serve on local exam teams during examinations, and collect feedback from MDIs on how the PFP can provide additional assistance. District coordinators meet regularly with MDI management to discuss emerging issues and provide technical assistance, especially to those in troubled condition, to explain supervisory guidance, discuss challenges, and respond to management concerns and inquiries. High-interest items include the Community Reinvestment Act, IT and cybersecurity, concentrations in commercial real estate, interest-rate risk, capital planning and rules, anti-money-laundering compliance, and third-party vendor management. We want to help MDIs navigate supervisory and regulatory requirements. To do that well, we want to continue to develop an open dialogue so we can better understand the challenges you face and how we can best help you wherever we have the ability to do so. Personal contact and relationship building are important to community banking and, I believe, also to community bank oversight. We want, and need, to hear your questions and concerns. Last April, we invited the leaders of all Fed-supervised MDIs to a Leaders Forum so we could spend a day and a half building relationships and talking about the needs of MDIs. We also encourage staff to reach out to MDIs and ensure that you are aware of our outreach meetings and research. Let's keep this communication going. We engage is these efforts because your institutions are vital to your communities and to the American economy. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, I'd like to once again thank you for the work you do in your communities and welcome you to this year's conference.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the "Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices" sponsored by the Federal Reserve, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Good morning. I am very pleased to welcome you here today. This conference is part of a first-ever public review by the Federal Open Market Committee of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications. We have a distinguished group of experts from academics and other walks of life here to share perspectives on how monetary policy can best serve the public. I’d like first to say a word about recent developments involving trade negotiations and other matters. We do not know how or when these issues will be resolved. We are closely monitoring the implications of these developments for the U.S. economic outlook and, as always, we will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective. My comments today, like this conference, will focus on longer-run issues that will remain even as the issues of the moment evolve. While central banks face a challenging environment today, those challenges are not entirely new. In fact, in 1999 the Federal Reserve System hosted a conference titled "Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Environment." Conference participants discussed new challenges that were emerging after the then-recent victory over the Great Inflation.1They focused on many questions posed by low inflation and, in particular, on what unconventional tools a central bank might use to support the economy if interest rates fell to what we now call the effective lower bound (ELB). Even though the Bank of Japan was grappling with the ELB as the conference met, the issue seemed remote for the United States. The conference received little coverage in the financial press, but a Reuters wire service story titled "Fed Conference Timing on Inflation Odd, but Useful" emphasized the remoteness of the risk.2Participants at the conference could not have anticipated that only 10 years later, the world would be engulfed in a deep financial crisis, with unemployment soaring and central banks around the world making extensive use of new strategies, tools, and ways to communicate. The next time policy rates hit the ELB—and there will be a next time—it will not be a surprise. We are now well aware of the challenges the ELB presents, and we have the painful experience of the Global Financial Crisis and its aftermath to guide us. Our obligation to the public we serve is to take those measures now that will put us in the best position deal with our next encounter with the ELB. And with the economy growing, unemployment low, and inflation low and stable, this is the right time to engage the public broadly on these topics. The review has several parts, all of which are intended to open our monetary policy to critical examination. We are holding a series ofFed Listensevents around the country to help us understand the perspectives of people from diverse backgrounds and with varied interests. This conference and many other engagements will help us bring to bear the best thinking from policymakers and experts. Beginning later this year, the FOMC will devote time at a series of our regular meetings to assess lessons from these events, supported by staff analysis performed throughout the Federal Reserve System. We will publicly report the outcome of our discussions. In the meantime, anyone who is interested in participating or learning more can find information on the Federal Reserve Board's website.3 Before turning to the specifics of the review, I want to focus a little more closely on the challenges we face today. For a reference point, at the time of the 1999 conference, the United States was eight years into an expansion; core inflation was 1.4 percent, and the unemployment rate was 4.1 percent—not so different from today.4Macroeconomists were puzzling over the flatness of the Phillips curve, the level of the natural rate of unemployment, and a possible acceleration in productivity growth—questions that are also with us today.5 The big difference between then and now is that the federal funds rate was 5.2 percent—which, to underscore the point, put the rate 20 quarter-point rate cuts away from the ELB. Since then, standard estimates of the longer-run normal or neutral rate of interest have declined between 2 and 3 percentage points, and some argue that the effective decline is even larger.6The combination of lower real interest rates and low inflation translates into lower nominal rates and a much higher likelihood that rates will fall to the ELB in a downturn. As the experience of the past decade showed, extended ELB episodes can be associated with painfully high unemployment and slow growth or recession. Economic weakness puts downward pressure on inflation, which can raise real interest rates and reinforce the challenge of supporting needed job growth. In addition, over time, inflation has become much less sensitive to tightness in resource utilization. This insensitivity can be a blessing in avoiding deflation when unemployment is high, but it means that much greater labor market tightness may ultimately be required to bring inflation back to target in a recovery. Using monetary policy to push sufficiently hard on labor markets to lift inflation could pose risks of destabilizing excesses in financial markets or elsewhere. In short, the proximity of interest rates to the ELB has become the preeminent monetary policy challenge of our time, tainting all manner of issues with ELB risk and imbuing many old challenges with greater significance. For example, the behavior of inflation7now draws much sharper focus. When nominal interest rates were around 4 or 5 percent, a low-side surprise of a few tenths on inflation did not raise the specter of the ELB. But the world has changed. Core inflation is currently running a bit below 2 percent on a trailing 12-month basis. In this setting, a similar low-side surprise, if it were to persist, would bring us uncomfortably closer to the ELB. My FOMC colleagues and I must—and do—take seriously the risk that inflation shortfalls that persist even in a robust economy could precipitate a difficult-to-arrest downward drift in inflation expectations. At the heart of the review is the evaluation of potential changes to our strategy designed to strengthen the credibility of our symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. The ELB problem also complicates the FOMC's efforts to achieve transparency and accountability. The Fed, like most major central banks, is insulated from short-term political pressures. In our democracy, that insulation carries with it an obligation for us to be transparent and publicly accountable. When policy rates reached the ELB during the crisis, central banks resorted to what were then new, untested tools to pursue their mandated goals. These tools are no longer new, but their efficacy, costs, and risks remain less well understood than the traditional approaches to central banking. My FOMC colleagues and I are committed to explaining why the use of these tools in the wake of the crisis was a prudent and effective approach to pursuing our congressional mandate and why tools like these are likely to be needed again. Our review is but one part of our efforts to engage with the public on these matters. Let me turn to the specifics of the review, which is focused on three questions: These questions are quite broad, and my colleagues and I come to them with open minds. We believe our current policy framework is working well, and we have made no decisions about particular changes. In fact, the review is still in its early stages. The first question raises the issue of whether the FOMC should use makeup strategies in response to ELB risks. By the time of the 1999 conference, research was beginning to show that—in models, at least—such strategies could substantially reduce the unemployment and other costs of ELB spells.8The simplest version goes like this: Suppose that a spell with interest rates near the ELB leads to a persistent shortfall of inflation relative to the central bank's goal. But what if the central bank promised credibly that it would deliberately make up for any lost inflation by stimulating the economy and temporarily pushing inflation modestly above the target? In the models, the prospect of future stimulus promotes anticipatory consumption and investment that could greatly reduce the pain of being at the ELB.9Policymakers discussed this reasoning in the wake of the crisis, but neither the Fed nor any other major central bank chose to pursue such a policy.10Why? For makeup strategies to work, households and businesses must go out on a limb, so to speak, raising spending in the midst of a downturn. In theory, they would do this based on their confidence that the central bank will deliver the makeup stimulus at some point—perhaps years in the future. In models, great confidence in central bankers is achieved by assumption. Despite the flattering nature of this assumption, crisis-era policymakers had major questions about whether their promise of good times to come would really have moved the hearts, minds, and pocketbooks of the public. Part of the problem was that the groundwork had not been laid in advance of the downturn—a problem we could hope to fix well before next time. Policymakers also had deeper concerns about the legitimacy and effectiveness of attempting to bind some future FOMC to take actions that could be objectionable from a short-term perspective when the time came to deliver.11 Research on makeup strategies has begun to grapple more seriously with the credibility questions.12But important questions remain. To achieve buy-in by households and businesses, a comprehensible, credible, and actionable makeup strategy will need to be followed by years of central bank policy consistent with that strategy. The second question asks about the adequacy of the Fed's toolkit for providing stimulus when facing the ELB. In the United States, we used several different formulations of both forward guidance and large‑scale purchases of longer-term securities.13While views differ on the effectiveness of these policies, with their use, the unemployment rate fell steadily and inflation expectations remained well anchored, outcomes that were favorable overall when viewed against the recoveries of many other advanced economies. My own view is that these policies provided meaningful support for demand, but that they should not be thought of as a perfect substitute for our traditional interest rate tool. In any case, we have a responsibility to thoroughly evaluate what mix of these tools is likely to work best when the next ELB episode arrives. Perhaps it is time to retire the term "unconventional" when referring to tools that were used in the crisis. We know that tools like these are likely to be needed in some form in future ELB spells, which we hope will be rare. We now have a significant body of evidence regarding the effectiveness, costs, and risks of these tools, including those used by the FOMC and others tried elsewhere. Our plans must take advantage of this growing understanding as assessments are refined. The third question concerns improving communication, which I discussed earlier from the standpoint of governance and accountability. But transparency also plays a central role in policy effectiveness through its effects on the expectations of households and businesses. Of course, this was the major insight behind the transparency revolution in central banking over the past few decades. Today, central banks publicly share a large and ever-increasing amount of information about policy. But policymakers and commentators inside and outside central banks sometimes question whether all of the transparency adds up to effective communication.14 The FOMC's famous dot plot is one example. A focus on the median forecast amounts to emphasizing what the typical FOMC participant would do if things go as expected. But we have been living in times characterized by large, frequent, unexpected changes in the underlying structure of the economy.15In this environment, the most important policy message may be about how the central bank will respond to the unexpected rather than what it will do if there are no surprises. Unfortunately, at times the dot plot has distracted attention from the more important topic of how the FOMC will react to unexpected economic developments. In times of high uncertainty, the median dot might best be thought of as theleast unlikelyoutcome. Let me conclude by saying that I look forward to our discussions here and to the ongoing work of the review that lies ahead. We need the best tools and strategies possible for dealing with the challenges we now face, and we must communicate them in a clear and credible way. My colleagues and I welcome your best thinking on these issues. ReferencesBank of Japan (2016)."New Framework for Strengthening Monetary Easing: 'Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing with Yield Curve Control,' " (PDF)announcement, September 21. Bernanke, Ben S. (2017)."Monetary Policy in a New Era," (PDF)paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute of International Economics, Washington, October 12–13. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019)."Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003)."The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy," (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139–211. English,William B., J. David López-Salido, and Robert J. Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (April), pp. 22–70. Greenspan, Alan (1998)."Question: Is There a New Economy?"speech delivered at the Haas Annual Business Faculty Research Dialogue, University of California, Berkeley, September 4. Hebden, James, and J. David López-Salido (2018)."From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Herbst-Bayliss, Svea (1999). "Fed Conference Timing on Inflation Odd, but Useful," Reuters News, October 20. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017),"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF)BrookingsPapers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–72. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019).Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates(PDF), Staff Report 877. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"Journal of Money, Credit andBanking,vol. 37 (October), pp. 837–63. Olson, Peter, and David Wessel (2016a)."Federal Reserve Communications: Survey Results." (PDF)Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings, November. ——— (2016b). "Survey Finds Mixed Feelings on Fed Communication,"Wall Street Journal,November 21. (Also reprinted and available on the Brookings Institution site athttps://www.brookings.edu/opinions/survey-finds-mixed-feelings-on-fed-communication.) Powell, Jerome H. (2018)."Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy,"speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25. Rachel, Lukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers (2019)."On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation," (PDF)paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Spring, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. Wiley-Blackwell (2000).Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 707–1109. Wolman, Alexander L. (2005). "Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 37 (March),pp. 273–96. 1. The proceedings of the conference were published in the November 2000 issue ofJournal of Money, Credit and Banking.Return to text 2. Herbst-Bayliss (1999).Return to text 3. More onFed Listensevents and related information is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text 4. The inflation rate referenced is the October 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy.Return to text 5. The discussion of all these issues was centered on Fed Chair Alan Greenspan's (1998) "New Economy" hypothesis that the United States had undergone fundamental changes for the better, leading to the otherwise puzzling outcomes.Return to text 6. See, for example, the estimates of the neutral rate reported on the New York Fed's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/rstar. Rachel and Summers (2019) give reasons why the effective change may be larger.Return to text 7. For example, based on the Federal Reserve staff's Greenbook forecast, across forecasts prepared for 59 FOMC meetings between 1997 and 2004, one-third of the year ahead, four-quarter inflation forecast errors were 0.5 percentage point or greater in absolute value. Error tended to be on the low side, and 45 percent of low-side misses were greater than 0.5 percentage point in absolute value.Return to text 8. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) and references therein. For a more recent review of this subject, see Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Mertens and Williams (2019).Return to text 9. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), for example, show that optimal policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during subsequent economic expansions. See also Wolman (2005) for a discussion of the effectiveness of price-level targeting at the ELB. For a discussion of the relationship between price-level targeting and average-inflation targeting, see Nessén and Vestin (2005). The strategy in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), for instance, involves a central bank following a Taylor rule modified to make up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes. Kiley and Roberts (2017) study a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during normal times to compensate for below-target inflation during ELB episodes. Also see Bernanke (2017) for a strategy in which low inflation is made up if it occurs when the federal funds rate is at or near the ELB. See also Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Mertens and Williams (2019).Return to text 10. The Bank of Japan (2016) came closest, announcing in September 2016 an "inflation-overshooting commitment" (p. 1). The commitment did not, however, come with any explicit goal for a degree or duration of overshoot.Return to text 11. These issues were discussed by the FOMC at several points, especially during 2011 (see the 2011 FOMC transcripts, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical2011.htm).Return to text 12. See, for example, English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015); Hebden and López-Salido (2018); Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019); and Mertens and Williams (2019).Return to text 13. For details on formulations used by the United States for forward guidance and large-scale purchases of longer-term securities as well as other references, see, for example,https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_openmarketops.htmandhttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/expiredtools.htm.Return to text 14. A 2016 Brookings conference titled "Understanding Fedspeak" (seehttps://www.brookings.edu/events/understanding-fedspeak) raised several aspects of this issue. For example, Olson and Wessel (2016a) presented results of a survey of those who follow the Fed closely; in an op-ed (2016b), they noted that "Some 73 percent of academics said Fed communications helps the markets; only 44 percent of private-sector Fed watchers agreed."Return to text 15. For more on changes in the underlying structure of the economy, see Powell (2018).Return to text Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (AFed ListensEvent) Fed ListensEvents
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event), Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Good morning, and welcome to day two of the Federal Reserve System Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices.1I think you will have to agree that the presentations and discussion yesterday were uniformly thoughtful, substantive, and stimulating, and today we will have another impressive lineup of speakers and panelists addressing timely topics that are relevant to our review. And let me convey on behalf of Chair Powell, the Board of Governors, and the Reserve Bank Presidents, a sincere and deep appreciation to all the participants on this program, especially the authors of the seven outstanding papers, for the time, thought, and energy that went into preparing their contributions. Yesterday Professors Eberly, Stock, and Wright provided us with a thorough and thoughtful evaluation of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications since 2009. They conclude that the policy tools that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) relied on—"level policy" and "slope policy," to use their terminology—helped restore the U.S. economy to health and bring it close to the statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to us by the Congress. As was noted several times yesterday, in recent years forecasters and policymakers have been surprised by the decline in the unemployment rate and the size of the sustained ongoing gains in payroll employment. FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment in the Summary of Economic Projections illustrate this point—they have drifted lower over time as labor market conditions have improved and inflation has remained quiescent.2The paper by Professors Abraham and Haltiwanger provided us with an innovative search-and-matching model to estimate labor market slack—which complements the standard estimates based on unemployment gaps and Phillips curve relationships. On that same general topic, the panel discussion of national and community leaders moderated by Governor Brainard provided a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from the aggregate statistics we often consult. Of course, notwithstanding what is taught in many U.S. macroeconomics courses, the United States is not a closed economy but is one of many nations engaged in global finance and economic commerce. Professor Obstfeld's paper examined the ways that global economic integration affects inflation and the neutral rate of interest—orr*—and the role played by the U.S. dollar in transmitting the Federal Reserve's monetary policy to other countries. In our final session yesterday, Professors Cecchetti and Schoenholtz assessed the Federal Reserve's communication practices. Based on interviews and conversations with market participants, academics, and former policymakers, Professors Cecchetti and Schoenholtz offered concrete suggestions for improving our most important communications vehicles. Our program today will feature papers by Lars Svensson on alternative monetary policy strategies, by Eric Sims and Cynthia Wu on the policy toolkit, and by Anil Kashyap and Caspar Siegert on the interplay between financial stability considerations and monetary policy. Our featured panel of national and community leaders moderated by President Rosengren will I'm sure offer valuable perspectives about how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses. Aside from being an intellectually stimulating two days, how does this week's conference fit into the FOMC's review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications? Let me describe briefly how the review is structured. Over the past several months, the individual Reserve Banks have been hosting a series ofFed Listensevents—seven so far including this conference—with at least five more to follow in coming months. Each event is organized with a format and list of participants that works best for that District but with two common elements: that Fed officials do most of the listening and that, when feasible, the events be live streamed. In Dallas, we heard from local leaders about the challenges facing lower-income communities. In Minneapolis, we listened to researchers discuss the distributional consequences of the economic cycle and of monetary policy. In Boston, we heard from small businesses, labor leaders, and groups that work in underserved communities about the effects of the Fed's policymaking on New England residents. In Camden, New Jersey, we learned about the workforce training initiatives of a local manufacturing firm. In Richmond, a panel of local business and community leaders discussed the ways the Fed's monetary policy affects the regional economy. In New York, panelists representing labor, local government, and community organizations offered their perspectives on the relative importance of the Fed's dual mandate goals. As I and my Fed colleagues who have participated in these events will attest, they have provided us with valuable perspectives on the economy that we would not otherwise be able to glean from aggregate economic statistics. In coming regularly scheduled meetings, the FOMC will undertake its assessment of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. This assessment will be informed by what we've heard at this conference, by our listening sessions in the Federal Reserve Districts, and by the work of System staff. When the Committee tackles important issues, we take the time for wide-ranging and candid discussions, and so I expect our deliberations will continue over several meetings for the remainder of this year. We will share our findings with the public when we have completed our review, likely during the first half of next year. Thank you and let's move directly to our first session. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Ellen Meade for assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. In January 2009, when longer-run projections were added to the Summary of Economic Projections, the midpoint of the central tendency for the longer-run normal unemployment rate was 4.9 percent. In March 2019, the median of the longer-run normal unemployment rate was 4.3 percent.Return to text Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (AFed ListensEvent) Fed ListensEvents
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, cohosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee and the New York University Stern School of Business and Its Salomon Center for the Study of Financial Institutions, New York, New York Good morning to you all. I am sorry I cannot be present at the Alternative Reference Rates Committee's (ARRC) fourth roundtable, but I wanted to share these remarks with you at what is the start of the next critical stage in the transition away from LIBOR.1 Since 2014, the official sector has publicly warned that LIBOR could become unstable. Not everyone paid attention to those warnings, but the risks that we pointed to have materialized. The U.K. Financial Conduct Authority has intervened to preserve LIBOR's stability only through the end of 2021. Despite that development, some continue to speculate that LIBOR can remain in production indefinitely. My key message to you today is that you should take the warnings seriously. Clarity on the exact timing and nature of the LIBOR stop is still to come, but the regulator of LIBOR has said that it is a matter ofhowLIBOR will end rather thanifit will end, and it is hard to see how one could be clearer than that. The Federal Reserve convened the ARRC based on our concerns about the stability of LIBOR. The ARRC was charged with providing the market with the tools that would be needed for a transition from LIBOR: an alternative rate that did not share the same structural instabilities that have led LIBOR to this point, a plan to develop liquidity in the derivatives market for this new rate so that cash users could hedge their interest rate risk, and models of better contract language that helped limit the risk from a LIBOR disruption. The ARRC has provided these tools. Now it is up to you to begin using them. With only two and a half years of further guaranteed stability for LIBOR, the transition should begin happening in earnest. I believe that the ARRC has chosen the most viable path forward and that most will benefit from following it, but regardless of how you choose to transition, beginning that transition now would be consistent with prudent risk management and the duty that you owe to your shareholders and clients. The ARRC's work began by focusing on creating a derivatives market for the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), its recommended alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR, because end users require derivatives markets to hedge their cash exposures. The CME Group, LCH, and Intercontinental Exchange, or ICE, all now offer futures or swaps markets on SOFR, and participation in these markets is growing. As liquidity in these markets continues to develop, my hope is that many of you will avail yourselves of them to close out your LIBOR positions. In the meantime, it will be crucial in ensuring global financial stability that everyone participate in the International Swaps and Derivatives Association's (ISDA) consultations on better fallback language for LIBOR derivatives and then sign the ISDA protocol so that these fallbacks apply to the legacy book of derivatives. Likewise, the ARRC has now offered better fallback language for new issuance of cash products that refer to LIBOR. It seems clear that much of the contract language being used currently did not envisage and is not designed for a permanent end to LIBOR. The ARRC's fallback recommendations represent a significant body of work on the part of a wide set of market participants and set out a robust and well-considered set of steps that expressly consider an end to LIBOR.2I urge everyone to avail themselves of this work; it is, again, important for prudent risk management and your fiduciary responsibilities that you incorporate better fallback language. Issuers should demand it of themselves, and investors should demand it of issuers. There is, however, also another and easier path, which is simply to stop using LIBOR. At this moment, many seem to take comfort in continuing to use LIBOR—it is familiar, and it remains liquid. But history may not view that decision kindly; after LIBOR stops, it may be fairly difficult to explain to those who may ask exactly why it made sense to continue using a rate that you had been clearly informed had such significant risks attached to it. And make no mistake—as good as the fallback language may be, simply relying on fallback language to transition brings a number of operational risks and economic risks. Firms should be incorporating these factors into their projected cost of continuing to use LIBOR, and investors and borrowers should consider them when they are offered LIBOR instruments. If you do consider these factors, then I believe you will see that it is in your interest to move away from LIBOR. In convening the ARRC, we have set a model of public-private sector cooperation to address a key financial stability risk. Ultimately, the private sector must drive this transition—these are private contracts, and each of you must choose how you can best address this risk—but the public sector must help. At a recent roundtable on the LIBOR transition held by the Financial Stability Board, we heard calls from the private sector to provide greater clarity on regulatory and tax implications of the transition and also calls for a more "muscular" regulatory approach. It is incumbent on the official sector to take these requests seriously, and we are. For example, the Federal Reserve is working with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and other U.S. prudential regulators to provide greater clarity on the treatment of margin requirements for legacy derivatives instruments. Agency staff are developing proposed changes to the margin rules for non-cleared swaps to ensure that changes to legacy swaps to incorporate a move away from LIBOR, including adherence to the ISDA protocol, would not affect the grandfathered status of those legacy swaps under the margin rules. This has been a key request of the ARRC, and we will look forward to public comment on the proposal. The Federal Reserve's supervisory teams have already included a number of detailed questions about plans for the transition away from LIBOR in their monitoring discussions with large firms. The Federal Reserve will expect to see an appropriate level of preparedness at the banks we supervise, and that level must increase as the end of 2021 grows closer. Our supervisory approach will continue to be tailored to the size of institution and the complexity of LIBOR exposure, but the largest firms should be prepared to see our expectations for them increase. As we consider the answers we have received from these firms, we will assess how our supervisory expectations for them should evolve in the coming year. Let me address one additional point relating to our supervisory stress tests, in an effort to provide further clarity. Some have recently claimed that the Federal Reserve's supervisory stress tests would penalize a bank that replaces LIBOR with SOFR in loan contracts by lowering projections of net interest income under stress. As can be seen in our recently published enhanced descriptions of the supervisory stress-test models, the interest rate variables that drive projections of net interest income under stress are the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, the yield on 3-month Treasury bills, and the 10-year triple-B corporate yield.3That is, the supervisory projections of net interest income are primarily based on models that implicitly assume that other rates such as LIBOR or SOFR move passively with short-term Treasury rates. Given these mechanics, choosing to lend at SOFR rather than LIBOR will not result in lower projections of net interest income under stress in the stress-test calculations of the Federal Reserve. I hope I have been able to provide you with some further clarity today. I am sure that the rest of the roundtable will do so as well. I want to applaud the members of the ARRC who are working hard to make sure this threat to financial stability is avoided. 1. Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles also serves as Chair of the Financial Stability Board. The remarks represent his own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The ARRC's recommendations for fallback contract language can be found athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/arrc/fallbacks-contract-language.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019),Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2019: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March), table 2, p. 23.Return to text