Governor Lael Brainard At the "Post-COVID—Policy Challenges for the Global Economy" Society of Professional Economists Annual Online Conference (via webcast) I want to express my appreciation to Kevin Daly for inviting me to participate in the Society of Professional Economists Annual Online Conference.1 The U.S. economy saw a strong initial bounceback from the depths of the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) crisis, aided by significant targeted support. The recovery remains highly uncertain and highly uneven—with certain sectors and groups experiencing substantial hardship. These disparities risk holding back the recovery. The Federal Reserve is committed to providing sustained accommodation to achieve a broad-based recovery. Further targeted fiscal support will be needed alongside accommodative monetary policy to turn this K-shaped recovery into a broad-based and inclusive recovery. K-Shaped Recovery?Targeted interventions, along with adaptations in the behavior of households and businesses, have enabled economic activity to recover. All told, after an unprecedented contraction in the first half of the year, U.S. gross domestic product appears likely to have reversed more than one-half of that decline in the third quarter. But within the overall improvement, some groups and sectors continue to see depressed employment, income, and revenues. Sustained disparities can hold back the recovery and lead to worse overall outcomes. Over the past month, the Federal Reserve Board has held three meetings with community groups, mission-oriented lenders, and representatives of frontline workers to hear about these disparities and their implications for the recovery. Overall, total consumer expenditures in the United States have recovered about three-fourths of their spring decline through August. Interest-sensitive sectors such as residential real estate and autos have rebounded strongly—a welcome reminder of the power of monetary accommodation, especially when coupled with necessary fiscal support. Consumer spending on goods posted robust gains over the summer, and August levels exceeded those in January. In sharp contrast, however, consumer spending on services through August has recovered only about 60 percent of its spring decline and remains well below pre-COVID-19 levels. At the aggregate level, indicators of business investment, including shipments of capital goods, have been stronger than anticipated and point to a solid increase in equipment and investment spending in the third quarter. In contrast, investment on nonresidential structures remains depressed. Activity in some sectors remains substantially below pre-COVID-19 levels. For instance, airline passenger traffic is still 60 percent below its pre-pandemic level, contributing to the decline in aircraft orders this year, and hotel revenue per available room is only half the level of a year earlier. Our actions have helped promote the flow of credit to households and businesses. Borrowing costs are low along the yield curve, and liquidity is abundant. Amid historically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds was strong in the third quarter. In contrast to the favorable financing conditions for large businesses with access to capital markets, financing conditions for small businesses remain tight, with lower lending activity and signs of deteriorating loan performance. Small businesses tend to be concentrated in sectors that entail high direct contact, operate with relatively tight cash buffers, and rely on bank credit rather market-based finance. In the most recent Census Bureau Small Business Pulse Survey from early October, more than 30 percent of small businesses report having one month or less of cash on hand. The most recent Federal Reserve Small Business Lending Survey indicates that the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) provided a critical lifeline for small and medium-sized businesses, but also that credit availability has otherwise tightened. Driven primarily by PPP-related loans, originations of new small business commercial and industrial loans in the second quarter of 2020 were more than nine times the size of originations in either the first quarter of 2020 or the second quarter of 2019.2However, 44 percent of respondents, on net, indicate loan standards tightened over the second quarter. About 43 percent of respondents, on net, reported a deterioration in the credit quality of small business applicants—the largest decline since the inception of the survey and only the second time in which respondents of all bank sizes, on net, reported a decline. Minority small businesses have been particularly hard hit. According to recent research, between February and April, the economy saw a 41 percent decline in Black business owners and a 32 percent decline in Latinx business owners, compared with a 22 percent overall decline.3 The labor market recovery to date has been more rapid than the initial pace following the Global Financial Crisis, but it has been uneven, and the easiest improvements are likely behind us. The pace of labor market improvement is decelerating at a time when employment is still far short of its maximum level. As of September, total nonfarm payroll employment had recovered about half of the jobs that were lost in March and April, and it remained about 11 million jobs below its February level. Private payroll gains in September were less than in July and August and came in far below the gains posted in May and June. Although the number of persons on temporary layoff has dropped back sharply from the highs in the spring to a level of 4.6 million in September, the number of permanent job losers has been rising since February and was at a level of 3.8 million in September. The job-finding rate for those who are permanently laid off is less than half the rate of those on temporary layoff, so the speed of labor market improvement is likely to decelerate further if these trends continue. Similarly, after seeing large declines during much of the summer, initial claims for unemployment insurance have crept up recently and remain elevated. The 1/2 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate in September to 7.9 percent was accompanied by a 0.3 percentage point decline in the labor force participation rate (LFPR).4The recent decline in prime-age labor force participation has been due primarily to women. September marks the third consecutive monthly decline in the prime-age female LFPR since it bounced back in May and June. The decline in September, when many schools moved to virtual instruction, was especially pronounced for women ages 35 to 44. Indeed, the fraction of prime-age respondents to the Current Population Survey in September with children ages 6 to 17 who reported being out of the labor force for caregiving reasons was about 14 percent, up nearly 2 percentage points from a year earlier.5If not soon reversed, the decline in the participation rate for prime‑age women could have longer-term implications for household incomes and potential growth. The COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating existing disparities in labor market outcomes. Although employment fell sharply for all groups between February and April, the decline was steeper for Black and Hispanic workers than for white and Asian workers, steeper for women than for men, and steeper for non-college-educated workers than for college graduates. At 12.1 percent, the unemployment rate for Black workers is more than 4 percentage points higher than the aggregate.6Occupation and industry affiliation can explain only part of these COVID-19 labor market disparities.7 In the years before the pandemic, I was encouraged to see prime-age individuals in all demographic groups drawn into the strong labor market, reversing the previous decline in participation and boosting the productive capacity of the economy.8Persistent spells out of employment risk harming not only the prospects of these individuals, but also the economy's potential growth rate. Regarding the other side of our dual mandate, the 12-month change in total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices picked up from 0.5 percent in April to 1.4 percent in August. Over the same period, core PCE price inflation picked up from 0.9 percent to 1.6 percent, supported lately by increases in prices of durable goods, including those for used cars and household appliances.9While inflation may temporarily rise to or above 2 percent on a 12-month basis next year when the March and April price readings fall out of the 12-month calculation, my baseline forecast for inflation over the medium term is for it to remain short of 2 percent over the next few years. Support for a Broad-Based and Inclusive RecoveryRecent research indicates that the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act played a significant role in supporting aggregate demand in the spring and summer. Enhanced unemployment benefits offset the lost income of many lower-wage and services workers, in some cases at greater-than-wage-replacement rates. Household spending stepped up in mid-April, coinciding with the first disbursement of stimulus payments to households and a ramp-up in the payout of unemployment benefits, and showed the most pronounced increases in the states that received more benefits.10 The Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that cash-constrained households make up a significant fraction of the population. With unemployment and reduced hours likely to persist, many of these households are unlikely to be able to sustain recent levels of consumption without additional fiscal support as well as extended loan forbearance and eviction moratoriums. The financial security of displaced workers will depend importantly on whether unemployment benefits will be extended or supplemented—and if this will occur before any remaining savings accrued from the CARES Act funding run out.11 Analogous questions arise with regard to the many hard-hit small businesses that were sustained early in the crisis by PPP loans, whose finances are becoming increasingly strained as revenue shortfalls persist. Similarly, the state and local governments that were able to weather tax-and-fee revenue shortfalls early in the crisis are likely to find it more difficult to sustain employment and spending levels the longer the pandemic persists in the absence of further fiscal support. Continued targeted support to replace lost incomes will be an important factor in determining the strength of the recovery. Apart from the course of the virus itself, the most significant downside risk to my outlook would be the failure of additional fiscal support to materialize. Too little support would lead to a slower and weaker recovery. Premature withdrawal of fiscal support would risk allowing recessionary dynamics to become entrenched, holding back employment and spending, increasing scarring from extended unemployment spells, leading more businesses to shutter, and ultimately harming productive capacity. The recovery will be broader based, stronger, and faster if monetary policy and fiscal policy both provide continued support to the economy. While monetary policy has helped keep credit available and borrowing costs low, fiscal policy has replaced lost incomes among households experiencing layoffs and businesses and states and localities suffering temporary drops in revenue. Monetary PolicyFinally, let me turn to how the new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy will help monetary policy achieve its goals. The new statement on goals and strategy seeks to align monetary policy with key longer-run changes in the economy.12The combination of a low neutral interest rate, underlying trend inflation below 2 percent, and the low responsiveness of inflation to resource slack embodied in a flat Phillips curve reduces the amount we can cut rates to buffer the economy, weakens inflation expectations, and could lead to worse employment and inflation outcomes over time. Consequently, it is important to strengthen our ability to achieve our employment and inflation goals by committing to a path of policy and lowering borrowing costs along the yield curve. The new statement on goals and strategy makes several key changes that should significantly improve the way the Committee conducts monetary policy. It eliminates the previous reference to a numerical estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate and instead defines the statutory maximum level of employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. It commits that the Committee will aim to eliminate shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, rather than the previous reference to deviations, which could be in either direction. By eliminating the rationale for removing accommodation preemptively when the unemployment rate nears estimates of the natural rate in anticipation of high inflation that is unlikely to materialize, the new framework will avoid an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many Americans. The broad-based and inclusive definition of maximum employment calls for a more comprehensive assessment of areas of slack in the labor market, such as the disparities in employment outcomes I discussed earlier. To address the downward bias associated with the proximity of the policy rate to its lower bound, the new statement on goals and strategy adopts a flexible inflation averaging targeting (FAIT) strategy that seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Under an inflation averaging strategy, appropriate monetary policy will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for a time to compensate for shortfalls during a period when it has been running persistently below 2 percent. The forward guidance adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in September gives concrete expression to the new strategy outlined in the new statement of goals and strategy. The forward guidance sets out outcome-based criteria that it expects to be achieved before the Committee lifts the policy rate from the lower bound. The labor market must reach "levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment." Inflation would need to rise to 2 percent, and, in addition, the Committee would need to assess that inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. The new FAIT framework is implemented not only through these outcome-based conditions for the liftoff of the policy rate, but also through the commitment that monetary policy will remain accommodative after liftoff for some time in order to achieve "inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time," consistent with longer-term inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. This implies there likely will be a period after liftoff when the policy rate remains below neutral to support the inflation makeup strategy and maximum employment. Research indicates that an important precondition for forward guidance to be effective is that the public understands and believes the policymakers' commitment to making it happen.13It will be important for the Committee to communicate clearly about our intentions and stay the course resolutely. How will we know if the new FAIT strategy is working? In addition to carefully monitoring labor market and inflation outcomes, it will be important to monitor a variety of indicators to see evidence that longer-term inflation expectations are moving sustainably to 2 percent. Inflation expectations are difficult to measure directly, so I generally consult a set of indicators to provide a more complete picture than any one measure on its own. Changes in expectations reported in surveys provide one important source of information. For instance, median 5- and 10-year PCE inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters both dropped considerably in the second quarter and stand at 1.7 percent and 1.85 percent, respectively, for the third quarter, which are the second lowest, and lowest, readings, respectively, in each series. The median 5-to-10-year measure from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers moved down in October to 2.4 percent, toward the lower end of its range in recent years, which is almost 1/2 percentage point below its range before 2014. In addition to survey data that are available at a monthly or quarterly frequency, we monitor market-based measures of inflation expectations that are available daily. To use market-based measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) or inflation swaps, the signal on inflation expectations must be separated from liquidity and term premiums through model-based methods.14After making those adjustments, TIPS-based 5- and 10-year inflation expectations were 1.41 percent and 1.66 percent, respectively, on the final day of the third quarter, up from the lows experienced in March but well below their historical average. Finally, it is useful to consult measures of underlying trend inflation.15A variety of estimates using time-series models suggest that underlying trend inflation may have moved down by as much as 1/2 percentage point over the past decade.16 It is difficult to anticipate how long it will take to achieve the conditions set out in the forward guidance. The September Summary of Economic Projections shows that most participants do not currently anticipate that the policy rate will depart from its lower bound by the end of 2023. When it does lift off, the policy rate could be expected to change only gradually, reflecting the commitment to remain accommodative until inflation has moderately exceeded 2 percent for some time. Of course, the pace of the recovery will dictate the actual path of monetary policy, as implied by the conditional outcome-based forward guidance adopted in September. Indeed, a key benefit of outcome-based forward guidance is that it conveys the Committee's monetary policy reaction function in a manner that is transparent and responsive to changes in economic conditions.17 In conjunction with the forward guidance on the policy rate, the commitment to continue asset purchases at least at the current pace over coming months is also helping to achieve our goals by keeping borrowing costs low for households and businesses along the yield curve. As noted in the September FOMC minutes, in the months ahead, we will have the opportunity to deliberate and to clarify how the asset purchase program could best work in combination with forward guidance to support achievement of maximum employment and 2 percent average inflation. While the strong bounceback in activity from the initial devastation of COVID-19 was heartening, the recovery thus far has been highly uneven, and the path ahead is highly uncertain. By pledging to provide accommodation until shortfalls from maximum employment have been eliminated and average inflation of 2 percent has been achieved, the new forward guidance will ensure that the recovery reaches those who have been disproportionately affected, leading to a broad-based and strong recovery. Continued asset purchases will help achieve these outcomes by keeping borrowing costs low for households and businesses along the yield curve. This strong support from monetary policy—if combined with additional targeted fiscal support—can turn a K-shaped recovery into a broad-based and inclusive recovery that delivers better outcomes overall. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The most recent Small Business Lending Survey (dated September 29, 2020) is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's website athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/research/indicatorsdata/smallbusinesslendingsurvey.Return to text 3. See Robert W. Fairlie (2020),"The Impact of COVID-19 on Small Business Owners: Evidence of Early-Stage Losses from the April 2020 Current Population Survey," (PDF)NBER Working Paper Series 27309 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June).Return to text 4. The reported unemployment rates used here also reflect misclassification, although this is declining. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has indicated that the official unemployment rate has understated the extent of joblessness in recent months because many workers who were on temporary layoff were incorrectly reported as being employed but absent from work. The BLS estimated that this misclassification held down the unemployment rate by about 5 percentage points in April, declining to about 0.4 percentage point in September.Return to text 5. Staff calculations based on the microdata from the September Current Population Survey.Return to text 6. After declining by 11.5 percentage points between February and April, the employment-to-population ratio for Black prime-age individuals has recovered by 4.5 percentage points. The comparable numbers for White prime-age individuals was a 10.4 percentage point decline followed by an improvement of 6 percentage points. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020),"Employment Status of the Civilian Noninstitutional Population by Race, Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity, Sex, and Age, Seasonally Adjusted,"table A-4, Current Population Survey (Washington: BLS, October).Return to text 7. Black and Latinx workers are overrepresented in the frontline fields of work that entail high contact and pose greater risks of exposure to infection. See Steven Brown (2020),"How COVID-19 Is Affecting Black and Latino Families' Employment and Financial Well-Being,"Urban Institute,Urban Wire: Race and Ethnicity(blog), May 6. Despite this, Cortes and Forsythe find that the larger increases in job losses suffered by individuals from disadvantaged groups, such as Hispanics, younger workers, those with lower levels of education, and women, can be explained only in part by occupation and industry affiliation; see Guido Matias Cortes and Eliza C. Forsythe (2020),"The Heterogeneous Labor Market Impacts of the Covid-19 Pandemic,"Upjohn Institute Working Paper Series 20-327 (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, May).Return to text 8. See Lael Brainard (2017),"Why Persistent Employment Disparities Matter for the Economy's Health,"speech delivered at "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, September 26, in addition to the citations therein; and Jerome H. Powell (2019),"Building on the Gains from the Long Expansion,"speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the Greater Providence Chamber of Commerce, Providence, R.I., November 25.Return to text 9. The trimmed mean PCE inflation rate calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas over the 12 months ending in August was 1.9 percent; the data as of August 2020 are available on the Bank's website athttps://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce.Return to text 10. Baker and others find that a panel of households responded quickly to CARES Act stimulus payments despite stay-at-home orders and social distancing; see Scott R. Baker, R.A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis (2020),"Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments,"NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May). Kargar and Rajan as well as Chetty and others find similar responses to the CARES Act using different data. See Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan (2020),"Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from Covid-19 Stimulus Payments,"Working Paper Series 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May; revised October 2020); and Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team (2020),"The Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built from Private Sector Data," (PDF)Opportunity Insights Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: Opportunity Insights, September).Return to text 11. The notable increase in the personal saving rate raises questions about how much these savings might enable households with income losses to smooth consumption in the months ahead and whether a burst of consumption might occur once uncertainty around the pandemic is resolved favorably. These questions hinge on the distribution of the savings. Such effects might be diminished, for instance, to the extent that a substantial amount of the savings might be held by high-income consumers, reflecting reduced opportunities to consume in-person services.Return to text 12. The new statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf. Information about the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications can also be found on the Board's website, athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm. In addition, see Lael Brainard (2020),"Bringing the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy into Alignment with Longer-Run Changes in the Economy,"speech delivered at "How the Fed Will Respond to the COVID-19 Recession in an Era of Low Rates and Low Inflation," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 1.Return to text 13. See Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019),"Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), in addition to analytical work developed as part of the framework review: Jonas Arias, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, Thorsten Drautzburg, and Andrea Raffo (2020),"Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help?" (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); and James Hebden, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020),"How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions?" (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text 14. See Don Kim, Cait Walsh, and Min Wei (2019),"Tips from TIPS: Update and Discussions,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 21).Return to text 15. See Lael Brainard (2017),"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate,"speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5.Return to text 16. Stock and Watson introduced an estimate of trend inflation that assumed time-varying volatility. Cecchetti and others provided an update of that model that estimated trend inflation for core PCE prices in 2017 as about 1-1/2 percent in the past few years, compared with readings above 2 percent in the 2006–08 period (see figure 4.1, p. 23). See James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2007), "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 39 (s1, February), pp. 3–33, available athttps://scholar.harvard.edu/stock/publications/why-has-inflation-become-harder-forecast. See also Stephen G. Cecchetti, Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017),Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics,(PDF)report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. In more recent work, Ahn and Fulton find that an index of common inflation expectations has declined over the past decade, and Rudd finds that more stable measures of trend inflation have not declined significantly over that period but, nonetheless, stand below the Committee's 2 percent objective. See Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020),"Index of Common Inflation Expectations,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2); and Jeremy Rudd (2020),"Underlying Inflation: Its Measurement and Significance,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18).Return to text 17. Staff analysis conducted during the framework review indicates that date-based guidance may not give the Committee sufficient scope to respond to incoming data, and the strategy could lose credibility if the dates are revised frequently. Date-based guidance may also run a greater risk than outcome-based guidance of inadvertently signaling a pessimistic outlook. For further discussion, see Jeffrey Campbell, Thomas B. King, Anna Orlik, and Rebecca Zarutskie (2020),"Issues regarding the Use of the Policy Rate Tool," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-070 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today finalized a rule to limit the interconnectedness and reduce the impact from failure of the largest banking organizations. The final rule is substantially similar to the proposal announced last year and complements other measures that the agencies have taken to limit interconnectedness among the largest banking organizations. U.S. global systemically important bank holding companies, or GSIBs, as well as U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign GSIBs, are required to issue debt with certain features under the Federal Reserve Board's "total loss-absorbing capacity," or TLAC, rule. That debt could be used to recapitalize the holding company during bankruptcy or resolution if it were to fail. To discourage the largest banking organizations from purchasing TLAC debt, the final rule prescribes a more stringent regulatory capital treatment for holdings of TLAC debt. The regulatory capital treatment in the final rule will help to reduce the interconnectedness between the largest banking organizations and, if a GSIB were to fail, reduce the impact on the U.S. financial system from that failure. This rulemaking also includes a revision to the Federal Reserve Board's TLAC requirements that will require GSIBs to report publicly their outstanding TLAC debt. The final rule is effective on April 1, 2021. Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Capital Treatment for Investments in Certain Unsecured Debt Instruments of Global Systemically Important U.S. Bank Holding Companies, Certain Intermediate Holding Companies, and Global Systemically Important Foreign Banking Organizations; Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Requirements (PDF) Board memo: Draft final rule specifying a regulatory capital treatment of investments in certain debt instruments issued by global systemically important firms (PDF)
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) and the Federal Reserve Board today invited comment on a proposed rule that would amend the recordkeeping and travel rule regulations under the Bank Secrecy Act. FinCEN and the Board, pursuant to their shared authority, are proposing amendments to the recordkeeping rule jointly, while FinCEN, pursuant to its sole authority, is proposing amendments to the travel rule. Under the current recordkeeping and travel rule regulations, financial institutions must collect, retain, and transmit certain information related to funds transfers and transmittals of funds over $3,000. The proposed rule lowers the applicable threshold from $3,000 to $250 for international transactions. The threshold for domestic transactions remains unchanged at $3,000. The proposed rule also further clarifies that those regulations apply to transactions above the applicable threshold involving convertible virtual currencies, as well as transactions involving digital assets with legal tender status, by clarifying the meaning of "money" as used in certain defined terms. Comments will be accepted for 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Threshold for the Requirement to Collect, Retain, and Transmit Information on Funds Transfers and Transmittals of Funds That Begin or End Outside the United States, and Clarification of the Requirement to Collect, Retain, and Transmit Information on Transactions Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies and Digital Assets with Legal Tender Status (PDF)
The federal bank regulatory agencies on Tuesday finalized a rule strengthening the resilience of large banks by requiring them to maintain a minimum level of stable funding over a one-year period. The net stable funding ratio, or NSFR, final rule will require large banks to maintain a minimum level of stable funding, relative to each institution's assets, derivatives, and commitments. As a result, the NSFR rule will support the ability of banks to lend to households and businesses in both normal and adverse economic conditions by reducing liquidity risk and enhancing financial stability. The NSFR's requirements are tailored to the risks of large banks with the most stringent requirements applying to the largest and most complex firms and less stringent requirements applying to firms with less risk. The NSFR complements the agencies' liquidity coverage ratio rule, which focuses on short-term liquidity risks. The final rule is generally similar to the proposal from May 2016 and includes several changes based on further analysis and public input on the proposal. In particular, the calibration is now tailored to be consistent with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Reform, and Consumer Protection Act, and matches the tailored calibration of the LCR. Additionally, the funding requirements for certain assets were modified to better reflect their risks and support the stability of certain funding markets. The final rule is effective on July 1, 2021. Holding companies and any covered nonbank companies regulated by the Federal Reserve will be required to publicly disclose their NSFR levels semiannually beginning in 2023. Federal Registernotice: Net Stable Funding Ratio: Liquidity Risk Measurement Standards and Disclosure Requirements (PDF) Board memo: Final rule to implement a net stable funding ratio requirement for large banking organizations (PDF) Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles Statement by Governor Brainard
Five federal financial regulatory agencies today invited comment on a proposal outlining and confirming the agencies' use of supervisory guidance for regulated institutions. The proposal would codify the statement, as amended, that was issued in September 2018 by the agencies that clarified the differences between regulations and guidance. Unlike a law or regulation, supervisory guidance does not have the force and effect of law and the agencies do not take enforcement actions or issue supervisory criticisms based on non-compliance with supervisory guidance. Rather, supervisory guidance outlines supervisory expectations and priorities, or articulates views regarding appropriate practices for a given subject area. In contrast to supervisory guidance, regulations do have the force and effect of law and enforcement actions can be taken if regulated institutions are in violation. Regulations are also generally required to go through the notice and comment process. Comments will be accepted for 60 days following publication in theFederal Register.
Federal bank regulatory agencies today released a paper outlining sound practices designed to help large banks increase operational resilience. Examples of risks to operational resilience include cyberattacks, natural disasters, and pandemics. The "Sound Practices to Strengthen Operational Resilience" paper outlines practices to increase operational resilience that are drawn from existing regulations, guidance, statements, and common industry standards. The practices are grounded in effective governance and risk management techniques, consider third-party risks, and include resilient information systems. The paper does not revise the agencies' existing rules or guidance. The practices are for domestic banks with more than $250 billion in total consolidated assets or banks with more than $100 billion in total assets and other risk characteristics. Please seeSR Letter 20-24for the current version of Sound Practices to Strengthen Operational Resilience
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced an enforcement action against Citigroup Inc. of New York, New York, that requires the firm to correct several longstanding deficiencies. In particular, the cease and desist order requires Citigroup to enhance its firm-wide risk management and internal controls. Among other things, the firm has not taken prompt and effective actions to correct practices previously identified by the Board in the areas of compliance risk management, data quality management, and internal controls. The Board's action applies to the bank holding company and is being taken in conjunction with a separate action from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which oversees the national bank. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Tuesday that it will begin the 2020 Census of Finance Companies and Other Lenders. The census is a key part of the Federal Reserve's effort to paint a complete picture of this important sector of the U.S. economy. "Your participation is important to help us understand the size and structure of lenders like yours that supply credit or lease financing to U.S. households and businesses," said Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell in a letter to prospective census participants. "The results will contribute to better-informed policy decisions and form the basis of our statistical releases, which have become all the more critical during the pandemic outbreak." The assets and liabilities of finance companies have been surveyed by the Federal Reserve at roughly five-year intervals since 1955. The data collected provide a benchmark for the System's monthly report on the outstanding accounts receivable of finance companies (presented in the Federal Reserve'sFinance Companiesstatistical release) and provide a comprehensive update on these companies' sources of funds. This information in turn becomes an important input to the estimates of total consumer credit (presented in the Federal Reserve'sConsumer Creditstatistical release) and theFinancial Accounts of the United States. The attached letter from Chair Powell was sent to approximately 26,000 companies urging their participation in the census. Individual responses will be kept confidential. In addition to the Chair's letter, more information about the census is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/financecocensus. The 2020 Census of Finance Companies and Other Lenders is not related to the 2020 Census of Population and Housing. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Letter from Chair Powell (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday adjusted the terms of the Main Street Lending Program in two important ways to better target support to smaller businesses that employ millions of workers and are facing continued revenue shortfalls due to the pandemic. In particular, the minimum loan size for three Main Street facilities available to for-profit and non-profit borrowers has been reduced from $250,000 to $100,000 and the fees have been adjusted to encourage the provision of these smaller loans. The Board and Department of the Treasury also issued a new frequently asked question clarifying that Paycheck Protection Program loans of up to $2 million may be excluded for purposes of determining the maximum loan size under the Main Street Lending Program, if certain requirements are met, which should also help smaller businesses access Main Street loans. The Main Street Lending Program supports lending to small and medium-sized for-profit businesses and nonprofit organizations that were in sound financial condition before the COVID-19 pandemic but lack access to credit on reasonable terms. To allow borrowers time to recover from the pandemic, the program offers several five-year loan options, with deferred principal and interest payments for qualified businesses and nonprofits. Loan documents reflecting the new terms are expected to be available to registered lenders within the next week. To date, the Main Street program has made almost 400 loans totaling $3.7 billion, providing support to businesses from a wide range of industries. The program was established with the approval of the Treasury Secretary and with $75 billion in equity provided by the Treasury Department from the CARES Act. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Main Street New Loan Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Main Street New Loan Facility Main Street Priority Loan Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Main Street Priority Loan Facility Main Street Expanded Loan Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Main Street Expanded Loan Facility Nonprofit Organization New Loan Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Nonprofit Organization New Loan Facility Nonprofit Organization Expanded Loan Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Nonprofit Organization Expanded Loan Facility FAQ: Do PPP loans count as "outstanding debt" for purposes of Main Street? (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the approval of the application by Allfunds Bank S.A.U., Madrid, Spain, to establish a representative office in Miami, Florida pursuant to section 10(a) of the International Banking Act of 1978. Attached is the order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by (1) Banco Bradesco S.A., (2) Lecce Holdings S.A., (3) Fundação Bradesco, (4) BBD Participações S.A., (5) Nova Cidade de Deus Participações S.A., and (6) Cidade de Deus Cia. Comercial de Participações, all of Osasco, Brazil, to acquire BAC Florida Bank, Coral Gables, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Bangor Bancorp, MHC, Bangor, Maine, to acquire Damariscotta Bankshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary state nonmember bank, Damariscotta Bank & Trust Co., both of Damariscotta, Maine. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday extended to March 31, 2021, temporary actions aimed at increasing the availability of intraday credit extended by Federal Reserve Banks on both a collateralized and uncollateralized basis. These temporary actions: (1) suspend uncollateralized intraday credit limits (net debit caps) and waive overdraft fees for institutions that are eligible for the primary credit program; (2) permit a streamlined procedure for secondary credit institutions to request collateralized intraday credit (max caps); and (3) suspend two collections of information that are used to calculate net debit caps. These temporary actions, which were announced on April 23, 2020, and originally set to expire on September 30, 2020, are consistent with the series of actions the Board has announced to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and to mitigate the disruptions from COVID-19. In particular, the temporary actions reinforce the Board's efforts to encourage regular use of intraday credit by healthy financial institutions. The Board'sFederal Registernotice attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced it has fined the Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. $154 million for the firm's failure to maintain appropriate oversight, internal controls, and risk management with respect to Goldman's involvement in a far-reaching scheme to defraud a Malaysian state-owned investment and development company, 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB). In 2012 and 2013, Goldman arranged and underwrote three bond offerings that raised $6.5 billion for 1MDB. Certain former Goldman bankers in Asia participated in a scheme with Malaysian businessman Low Taek Jho and others to divert substantial portions of the proceeds from the 1MDB offerings for their personal benefit and to pay bribes to certain foreign government officials. Goldman's transaction approval processes and internal controls failed to detect or prevent the scheme or to address obvious red flags around the 1MDB offerings. The Board is requiring Goldman to improve its risk management and oversight of significant and complex transactions, enhance its due diligence related to these transactions, and improve its anti-bribery compliance program. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with actions by other authorities including the U.S. Department of Justice, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the New York Department of Financial Services, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority, and the Bank of England Prudential Regulation Authority, and other foreign authorities. The penalties and disgorgement announced by all of the agencies total approximately $2.9 billion. The Board has previously prohibited from banking three former Goldman employees in connection with the 1MDB offerings. In March 2019, the Board prohibited former Goldman employees Tim Leissner and Roger Ng for their roles in the scheme to divert bond proceeds. Leissner was also fined $1.42 million. In January 2020, the Board also prohibited former Goldman employee Andrea Vella for unsafe and unsound practices in connection with the bond offerings. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Atlantic Community Bankers Bank, Camp Hill, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement dated September 28, 2020 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent cease and desist order against Weldon Riggs, an employee of First Savings Bank, Jeffersonville, Indiana, for engaging in unsafe and unsound practices while supervising a loan production office. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: M&T Bank, Buffalo, New YorkFlood insurance violations civil money penalty, dated October 14, 2020 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday published detailed noncash payments data from the 2019 Federal Reserve Payments Study (FRPS). The additional data, estimated from surveys covering 2012 through 2018, supplement the noncash payments overview provided by the top-line data released in December 2019. The FRPS Detailed Data Release includes new information about core noncash payments and some evolving areas of payments in the United States: The FRPS Detailed Data Release includes data from the Networks, Processors, and Issuers Payments Surveys (NPIPS) and the Depository and Financial Institution Payments Survey (DFIPS). NPIPS is a collection of surveys, each conducted as a census of the applicable organizations, including card networks and processors and issuers of core and alternative payment methods and services. DFIPS is a survey of a representative sample of insured depository institutions of different sizes and types that process payments. The Federal Reserve Payments Study is an ongoing effort to document aggregate changes in the payments system. The study has estimated national volumes across all noncash payment types every three years since 2000, with supplements providing national estimates for card payments and partial information on other payments for 2016 and 2017. NPIPS was conducted with the assistance of Blueflame Consulting. DFIPS was conducted with the assistance of GCI Analytics, a division of McKinsey and Company. To access the detailed data in this release and to obtain further information on the FRPS please visit:https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fr-payments-study.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday requested public comment on technical, clarifying updates regarding the Federal Open Market Committee's Rules Regarding Availability of Information, which describe its Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) procedures. The proposal would implement non-substantive updates to the Committee's FOIA procedures to make them consistent with the Committee's current practices and to incorporate recent changes in law and guidance. The proposal also incorporates formatting and language from the Federal Reserve Board's revisions to its own FOIA procedures, which are effective October 15, 2020. Comments are due within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Rules Regarding Availability of Information (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from August 24 through September 16, 2020. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 15–16, 2020. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 15-16, 2020:HTML|PDF
Governor Lael Brainard To the National Bankers Association (via webcast) I want to thank Kim Saunders and Kenneth Kelly for inviting me to join members of the National Bankers Association (NBA) for a conversation today.1 As mission-driven financial institutions with a focus on serving minority households and businesses, you see the significant racial disparities in our economy every day. Going into the crisis, Black and Latinx households had significantly smaller wealth cushions to fall back on than the average American household. For instance, Federal Reserve research based on the Survey of Consumer Finances notes that, in 2019 "the typical White family has eight times the wealth of the typical Black family and five times the wealth as the typical Hispanic family."2 The COVID-19 crisis has made existing racial disparities even worse. Low-wage and minority workers have experienced disproportionate harm to both their lives and livelihoods as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. As you know from the communities you serve, the crisis has exacerbated pre-existing disparities in the labor market. Black employment, in particular, is recovering at a much slower pace than employment in the overall population, and unemployment for Black and Hispanic/Latinx workers remains higher than for the workforce as a whole. As of last month, the overall unemployment rate had come down to 7.9 percent, which was a marked improvement from 14.7 percent in April. However, the September unemployment rate for Black Americans was still 12.1 percent, more than 4 percentage points higher than the overall unemployment rate.3 Research confirms that the COVID-19 pandemic has inflicted substantial harm on small businesses, particularly minority-owned businesses. For example, recent research documented that the number of working Black and Latinx small business owners declined in the early months of the crisis by even more than White small business owners. According to this research, the nation saw a 22 percent decline in small business owners between February and April overall, as compared with an even more precipitous 41 percent decline in Black business owners and 32 percent decline in Latinx business owners.4 Contributing to this perfect storm, minority individuals are suffering worse health outcomes as a result of COVID-19. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) report significant disparities in the infection rate of COVID-19 by race and ethnicity, with Black, Latinx, and Native American individuals contracting COVID-19 at over two and a half times the rate of White, non-Hispanic individuals. For those who do contract COVID-19, African Americans are suffering twice the mortality rate of White, non-Hispanic individuals.5 The disparities in COVID-19 health risk reflect in part differences in the ability to work remotely, with minority individuals more likely to work in front line jobs that put their health at risk. Black and Latinx workers are overrepresented in the fields of work that entail high contact and pose greater risks of exposure to infection. For example, Black and Latinx workers are overrepresented in most essential positions, including nursing home staff, grocery store workers, bus drivers, postal workers, and warehouse workers.6 Against that challenging backdrop, the national conversation we are having right now about racial justice and racial equity ignited by the tragic death of George Floyd could not be more urgent.7And the NBA's "mission of creating an inclusive financial services industry and a vibrant business environment for minority business institutions, their customers and the communities they serve" could not be more important.8Minority depository institutions (MDIs) are important actors in serving the financial needs of minority customers and small businesses, as well as providing community development resources to invest in minority communities. The COVID-19 pandemic only heightens the importance of the role you are playing. Your firsthand experiences of working with minority borrowers and your knowledge of local communities make you essential partners in better targeting our tools to assist low-income and minority small businesses and communities. You have provided valuable input on Federal Reserve programs, from the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) to the Main Street Lending Program, to Community Reinvestment Act reform. Over the last month alone, the Federal Reserve Board has held three sessions with representatives of MDIs, community development financial institutions (CDFIs), and vulnerable groups to discuss the challenges faced by underserved communities. We have heard about the extraordinary measures MDIs have taken to keep their banks accessible, modify loans, and extend Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans to new and existing customers, predominantly small, minority-owned businesses. Preliminary data from an Independent Community Bankers of America report indicate that your work, and the work of other community banks, has been a critical source of lending to minority-owned small businesses, accounting for 73 percent of all PPP loans made to minority-owned small businesses.9In addition, some mission-focused institutions have participated in the Main Street New Loan Facility, and we continue to welcome your feedback on how to support institutions reaching the businesses and communities most in need. In addition, we are hearing of greater commitments to promote MDIs and CDFIs on the part of large institutions. A number of Black-owned banks, including NBA member banks, are involved in new partnerships to address racial disparities in access to credit and provide wealth-building opportunities.10These recent developments are only the latest chapter in how your sector continues to grow and lean into the challenges this nation faces. The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) is one of the most powerful tools we have for addressing systemic inequities in credit access for minority individuals and communities. Last month, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on the CRA. The ANPR is built on ideas advanced by a broad set of stakeholders, including the NBA and MDIs. It has been 25 years since we last reformed CRA, so it is important that we get it done right. The CRA is a critical law, enacted along with other complementary federal civil rights laws during the late 1960s and 1970s, to address redlining and systemic inequities in access to credit and other financial services for minority communities that contributed to dramatic differences in economic access and overall financial well-being. Even with these critical laws, the legacy of discriminatory lending and systemic inequity in credit access remains in evidence today. A foundational goal for the ANPR is to advance the core purpose of the CRA statute. Right at the outset, the ANPR asks for open-ended feedback on a foundational question: how should CRA's regulatory implementation be modified or changed to address systemic inequity in credit access to minority individuals and communities? As leaders in this field, we welcome your feedback on how to strengthen CRA implementation to further the statute's core purpose. Advancing the CRA's core purpose includes strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of low-income and minority banking needs are being met. As part of this objective, CRA modernization provides a unique opportunity to carefully examine the MDI provisions in the CRA statute to ensure proposed changes to the regulation maximize the benefit and impact for MDI banks and the customers and communities they serve. In the ANPR, we placed a priority on strengthening the special consideration for MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions in the current regulation, as well as adding new proposals based on your feedback. The Board believes that any provisions to assist MDIs should be clearly defined and applied in CRA performance assessments. We consistently heard from MDIs and larger banks that there is a lack of awareness of the existing MDI provisions in the CRA regulations or a lack of understanding of how collaboration with MDIs ultimately "count" in a CRA examination. In response, the Board plans to highlight all MDI special provisions and make the credit they receive more prominent and clear in revised regulation, examination guidance, and other public documentation. In addition, in the ANPR, we proposed four specific new MDI provisions. First, the ANPR proposes giving banks credit for activities with MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions located outside their assessment areas at either the state or institution level, which would ensure that there is a clear "place" for such activities to be counted. Though majority-owned institutions currently can get CRA consideration for activities with MDIs outside of the majority-owned institution's assessment areas(s), we have heard feedback that there can be a lack of clarity about where and how these activities will count in their CRA rating. As a result, stakeholders like NBA have indicated that such activities are not common. The second proposal would explicitly designate activities in MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions as a potential pathway to achieving an "outstanding" CRA rating. The purpose of this provision would be to elevate the profile of and create more incentives for activities with these mission-oriented institutions. The third proposal would provide credit for MDIs and women-owned financial institutions investing in other MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. Currently, only majority-owned institutions can receive CRA consideration for investing in MDIs. We know that MDIs vary greatly in size, and we have heard from MDIs that there could be mutually beneficial partnerships between MDIs. Finally, the ANPR proposes providing credit for MDIs and women-owned financial institutions investing in limited activities to improve their own banks. Eligibility could be limited to activities that demonstrate meaningful investment in the business, such as staff training, hiring new staff, opening new branches in minority neighborhoods, or expanding products and services. In addition to activities specific to MDIs, the ANPR seeks to strengthen CRA's core purpose in other ways. This includes proposals to promote greater financial inclusion, such as allowing banks to get credit for community development activities outside of assessment areas but in designated areas with persistent unmet needs. An example mentioned in the ANPR is activities in Indian Country. Native American MDIs have been working diligently to serve Indian Country for years with limited resources; we hope that our proposals will bring additional capital into Indian Country to complement the work of Native American MDIs. Our second major goal for the ANPR is to provide greater certainty, tailor regulations based on bank size and business model, and minimize burden. There are a number of proposals to advance these objectives. Most MDIs are small banks, so let me say a bit more about the proposals in the ANPR that are tailored to small banks. Under the ANPR proposals, small retail banks would continue to have their retail lending activities evaluated under the current CRA framework unless they elect to be evaluated under the proposed Retail Lending Subtest using a metrics-based approach. Small banks that opt for the metrics-based approach would also have the option to submit retail services and community development activities for consideration, and we are interested in feedback on how to do this. Additionally, the ANPR proposes ways to minimize data collection and reporting burden by relying on existing data as much as possible, as well as exempting small banks from deposit and certain other data collection requirements. Our third major goal for the ANPR is to provide a foundation for the agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders like NBA have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing an appropriately long period for public comment, the ANPR advances the goal of building a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has the broad support of stakeholders. All three regulators have benefitted from the stakeholder comments provided through comment letters, roundtables, and meetings. There is significant interagency agreement on the objectives of CRA reform and many of the ideas in the ANPR reflect interagency discussions and regulatory proposals. In closing, we look forward to modernizing the CRA in a way that strengthens the regulations to advance the core purpose of the statute, while providing greater certainty, tailoring regulations, and minimizing burden. We have appreciated the NBA's strong engagement throughout this process, and we look forward to your continued engagement as we seek to converge on a consistent approach that has broad stakeholder support. Our Partnership for Progress Program seeks ways to preserve and promote MDIs through engagement, technical assistance, and research in recognition of your institutions' continued innovation and flexibility in adapting to the ever-changing financial needs of your communities. We see CRA modernization as a significant opportunity to strengthen further the ability of MDIs to serve their communities, and we hope that you will provide us with feedback on how to modernize the CRA regulations in a way that supports MDIs and the communities you serve. Thank you. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts, Carrie Johnson, and Joseph Firschein of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Neil Bhutta, Andrew C. Chang, Lisa J. Dettling, and Joanne W. Hsu,"Disparities in Wealth by Race and Ethnicity in the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances"(Washington: Board of Governors, September 2020).Return to text 3. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,"Employment status of the civilian noninstitutional population by race, Hispanic or Latino ethnicity, sex, and age, seasonally adjusted,"Current Population Survey (Washington: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, October 2020).Return to text 4. Robert W. Fairlie,"The Impact Of Covid-19 On Small Business Owners: Evidence Of Early-Stage Losses From The April 2020 Current Population Survey" (PDF)(Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2020).Return to text 5."COVID-19 Hospitalization and Death by Race/Ethnicity,"Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, last modified August 18, 2020.Return to text 6. Steven Brown,"How COVID-19 is Affecting Black and Latino Families' Employment and Financial Well-Being,"The Urban Institute, last modified May 6, 2020.Return to text 7. See Raphael Bostic,"A Moral and Economic Imperative to End Racism,"Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (website), last modified on June 12, 2020, and"Series on Racism and the Economy,"Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Minneapolis, last modified on October 7, 2020.Return to text 8.https://www.nationalbankers.org/Return to text 9. Independent Community Bankers of America,"Data Show Community Banks Lead Economic Recovery,"news release, August 19, 2020.Return to text 10. Broadway Financial Corporation and CFBanc Corporation,"Broadway Financial Corporation and CFBanc Corporation to Combine to Create the Largest Black-Led Minority Depository Institution in the U.S.," (PDF)news release, August 26, 2020.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the National Housing Conference National Advisory Council Meeting I want to thank David Dworkin for inviting me to participate in this discussion. I am pleased to be with you to talk about Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) modernization and how this process can help address the housing challenges facing minority and low- and moderate-income (LMI) communities around the country.1The National Housing Conference (NHC) is an important voice in housing and community development policy, so I look forward to hearing from you. During the mortgage foreclosure crisis, many families around the country suffered the devastating loss of their home through no fault of their own, and homeownership rates have not recovered to pre-crisis levels for the affected groups. Now, the COVID-19 pandemic is raising a new set of housing challenges for renters and the rental market. The current crisis is hitting LMI households with limited financial resources the hardest, and this is especially true for Black and Latinx households. Data from the Census Household Pulse Survey indicate that 25 percent of Black renters and 22 percent of Hispanic renters were behind on their rent payments as of September, along with 12 percent of White renters.2Among homeowners, Black and Hispanic households have been "significantly more likely to miss or defer monthly mortgage payments and experience uncertainty about making next month's payment than white households" during the pandemic.3 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act emergency payments and supplemental unemployment benefits provided vital support to households in the initial stages of the crisis, and the mortgage forbearance period of up to 360 days in the Act and eviction moratoriums at the federal, state, and local level have provided vital stop-gap stability for many families. There is growing concern about what will happen to individuals who may be behind on their rent or mortgage payments as a result of job loss or reduced hours when eviction moratoriums and mortgage forbearance programs come to an end, especially given uncertainty about whether there will be further fiscal support. The housing challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic are layered on top of existing challenges in both the homeownership and rental markets. Affordable housing is essential to providing low-income households the stability necessary to engage in employment and schooling, provide for essential needs, and accumulate some financial cushion for emergencies. However, the need for affordable housing has grown at a faster pace than the supply.4With limited supply of lots and other challenges, new construction in many places has been oriented to higher-end units, leaving more limited supply for households with lower incomes, especially in higher cost cities. Many households have been unable to purchase a home since the last financial crisis due to a confluence of factors, including higher home prices and stricter lending standards.5For those who have purchased a home, higher home prices have translated into higher debt levels relative to household income. For renters, available subsidies or programs for affordable housing have fallen short of the need, particularly in higher cost cities, while new higher-end rental housing has increased significantly since the financial crisis. The high cost of renting leaves many families paying a higher share of their income for housing. American Community Survey data from 2019 show that 45 percent of renter households spend more than 30 percent of their monthly income on rent.6While 22 percent of renters pay more than half of their income toward rent, this figure jumps to nearly 38 percent for renters earning below $50,000.7This leaves families with little to no room to save for emergencies, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. This growing shortage underscores the importance of the incentives provided by the CRA for the production and rehabilitation of affordable housing. With the demand for affordable units significantly exceeding supply, it is essential to strengthen the incentives for these loans and investments as part of CRA modernization. Increasing access to affordable housing is critical to creating opportunities for homeownership for LMI households and with it the chance to build wealth through home equity. Here too, CRA plays a role, not only in providing incentives for the provision of affordable housing, but also in encouraging access to credit for homeownership for LMI households and communities. Indeed, mortgage lending has long been at the center of evaluating CRA performance. The challenges facing LMI and minority renters and would-be homeowners underscore the importance of getting CRA modernization right. The Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) about CRA modernization on September 21, 2020.8The ANPR was published yesterday in theFederal Register, and the comment period will end on February 16, 2021.9By providing a 120-day comment period, we hope to receive comments from a wide range of stakeholders and build on the already robust feedback that informed the development of the ANPR. Throughout this process, NHC has provided the Federal Reserve with valuable insights into the unique role and needs of affordable housing providers. Your members support community development projects in communities throughout the country, and we have benefited from the engagement of NHC and its members both in the form of detailed comment letters and through meetings to discuss different aspects of CRA reform. The CRA is a critical law, enacted along with other complementary federal civil rights laws during the late 1960s and 1970s. The intent of these laws was to address redlining and systemic inequities in access to credit and other financial services for LMI and minority communities. The core purpose of CRA remains as important as ever, especially given the national conversation we are having about racial equity in our society and the disproportionate impact that COVID-19 is having on LMI and minority communities. Even with these critical laws, the wealth gap remains stubbornly wide.10The Survey of Consumer Finances for 2019 found that the typical White family has eight times the wealth of the typical Black family.11For many American families, homeownership is the single most important component of their wealth. In 2019, the homeownership rate for Black households was 42.1 percent, as compared to the 73.3 percent for White households.12This homeownership gap of 31.2 percent is 3.1 percentage points wider than a decade ago. The Board's ANPR seeks to advance the law's core purpose of addressing unequal access to credit for LMI and minority communities and disinvestment in underserved communities. A modernized CRA should help move the needle on credit access, wealth building, and the availability of community development financing. This includes strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of low-income and minority banking needs are being met. It also includes promoting financial inclusion by proposing incentives for further bank investments in Minority Depository Institutions, Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), and community development activity in designated areas of need outside of assessment areas, such as Indian Country. The ANPR also seeks to provide greater certainty, tailor regulations based on bank size and business model, and minimize burden. For example, the ANPR introduces a metrics-based approach that would separately evaluate retail lending and community development financing activity. The use of standardized metrics would provide greater clarity and transparency on how lending and investment activity is evaluated. These proposed metrics would also use thresholds that are tailored to local market conditions, while also retaining a focus on targeted performance context factors. Lastly, we hope the ANPR will provide a foundation for the agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders, including the NHC, have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing a long public comment period, we believe that the ANPR provides the basis for the agencies to establish a consistent approach that has broad support. Before concluding, I want to highlight a few proposals in the ANPR that have particular relevance to affordable housing. First, the ANPR proposes two separate tests for evaluating the CRA performance of large retail banks—a Retail Test and a Community Development Test—in response to the overwhelming stakeholder feedback we heard about the vital importance of both retail and community development activities. In the ANPR, each of these tests would have a subtest that focuses on financing and a subtest that focuses on services, resulting in four overall subtests for large retail banks. Second, the ANPR proposes evaluating a bank's retail lending in its major product lines using metrics that measure the number of loans a bank makes, not the dollar-value of these loans. As a result, a larger mortgage loan would count the same as a smaller-dollar mortgage under the proposed metrics. We think this is important to avoid providing incentives to serve borrowers seeking to finance higher-priced homes at the expense of lower-income borrowers seeking finance for lower-priced homes. Third, the ANPR proposes combining consideration of community development loans and qualified investments, including originations and purchases, into one metrics-based Community Development Financing Subtest. We believe this could encourage the provision of patient capital because both new originations and those already on the balance sheet would be included in the evaluation metric. Fourth, stakeholders have emphasized the critical importance of CRA-motivated capital as a source of funding for affordable rental and single-family housing for LMI populations. Given the significant unmet need for affordable housing, the ANPR provides an opportunity to carefully reconsider how we define affordable housing in the CRA regulations and how we can strengthen existing provisions for the creation and preservation of affordable housing, both rental and owner-occupied. The ANPR proposes new regulatory language that would specify that a housing unit would be considered affordable if it is purchased, developed, rehabilitated, or preserved in conjunction with a federal, state, local, or tribal government affordable housing program or subsidy, with the bona fide intent of providing affordable housing. This definition is intended to capture a wide variety of subsidies, including tax credit programs (such as the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit), federal government direct subsidies, and state and local government direct subsidies for the production or preservation of affordable housing. These programs could be for rental housing or homeownership. The suggested language is also intended to capture programs that do not provide monetary subsidies, but that have the express intent of producing or preserving affordable housing, such as a loan in support of a land bank program. In addition, many stakeholders have noted the importance of preserving unsubsidized housing that is affordable to LMI households and ensuring units retain their affordability in gentrifying areas. In response to these concerns, the ANPR seeks to clarify the criteria under which banks can receive CRA consideration for investing in unsubsidized, or naturally-occurring, affordable housing. We are also considering other options to ensure that housing-related community development financing activities maintain long-term affordability, limit displacement, and encourage affordable housing located in all communities. As experts in this field, we look forward to receiving your feedback on what specific data sources and criteria we should consider to promote the preservation of naturally-occurring, affordable housing. Fifth, the ANPR seeks feedback on the appropriate CRA treatment of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) that are backed by loans that finance subsidized multifamily rental housing, loans for mixed-income housing that includes affordable housing for LMI families, or loans to LMI borrowers. While issuance of qualifying MBS can improve liquidity, and thereby increase capacity for lenders that make home mortgage loans to LMI borrowers, some stakeholders have expressed concern that MBS purchases may be undertaken in lieu of other more impactful community development financing activities that may require greater effort. Finally, the ANPR seeks feedback on extending to CDFIs the status that is extended to Minority Depository Institutions, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. Such an approach would effectively give banks CRA consideration for loans, investments, or services in conjunction with a CDFI anywhere in the country. Additionally, the ANPR discusses granting automatic CRA community development consideration for qualified activities in conjunction with U.S. Department of the Treasury-certified CDFIs for activities in a bank's assessment area(s). We hope that you will provide us with feedback on how to modernize the CRA in a way that supports affordable housing and promotes housing-related credit and investments to LMI and minority individuals and communities. We thank you for your engagement and look forward to hearing more from you and your members through the rulemaking process. 1. I am grateful to Lisa Robinson of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. United States Census Bureau,Week 14 Household Pulse Survey: September 2 – September 14. Data are staff calculations from data in the U.S. Census Household Pulse Survey.Return to text 3. Jung Hyun Choi, "Six Facts You Should Know about Current Mortgage Forbearances,"Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance(blog), Urban Institute, August 18, 2020.Return to text 4. Joint Center for Housing Studies,State of the Nation's Housing 2019(PDF)(stating "[j]ust as the recent housing downturn was longer and deeper than any other since the Great Depression, the residential construction rebound has been slower. Since reaching bottom in 2011 at just 633,000 new units, additions to the housing stock have grown at an average annual rate of just 10 percent. Despite these steady gains, completions and placements totaled only 1.2 million units last year—the lowest annual production, excluding 2008–2018, going back to 1982… according to Joint Center for Housing Studies estimates, annual construction should now be on the order of 1.5 million units, or about 260,000 higher than in 2018.").Return to text 5. See Elliot Anenberg, Aurel Hizmo, Edward Kung, and Raven Molloy, "Measuring mortgage credit availability: A frontier estimation approach,"Journal of Applied Economics, 34(6), 865-882; Laurie Goodman, Jun Zhu, Taz George, "Four million mortgage loans missing from 2009 to 2013 due to tight credit standards,"Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance(blog), Urban Institute, April 2, 2015.Return to text 6. United States Census Bureau,American Community Survey(2019 ACS 1-year estimates, Table: B25074).Return to text 7. See United States Census Bureau, American Community Survey in note 6.Return to text 8.Federal Reserve Board issues Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on an approach to modernize regulations that implement the Community Reinvestment Act, September 21, 2020.Return to text 9.85 Fed. Reg. 66,410 (PDF), October 19, 2020.Return to text 10. Lael Brainard, "Strengthening the CRA to Meet the Challenges of Our Time," (remarks delivered via webcast at the Urban Institute, Washington, D.C., October 1, 2020).Return to text 11. Neil Bhutta, Andrew C. Chang, Lisa J. Dettling, and Joanne W. Hsu, "Disparities in Wealth by Race and Ethnicity in the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances" (Washington: Board of Governors, September 2020).Return to text 12. United States Census Bureau,Current Population Survey, Housing Vacancies and Homeownership, March 10, 2020.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard To the Independent Community Bankers of America Fall Leadership Meeting (via webcast) Thank you for inviting me here today to take part in your Fall Leadership Meeting.1 We recognize that community banks play a vital role in the communities you serve. Your insights into local conditions and your long-standing customer relationships afford you a deep understanding of the needs and characteristics of the households and small businesses in your communities, and enable you to meet their credit needs effectively. The value of these relationships has never been more evident than during this crisis—a fact that my colleague, Governor Michelle Bowman, highlighted yesterday when she said "it is no surprise that community banks are standing shoulder to shoulder with their customers, on the front lines." Governor Bowman referred to an Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) report that cites preliminary data on the Paycheck Protection Program that community banks have been the main source of lending for minority-owned small businesses during the pandemic and noted the same is true for veteran-owned businesses.2 As you know, last week, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA).3The ANPR is built on ideas advanced by stakeholders. Throughout this process, the ICBA has been an important source of information, which has provided the Federal Reserve valuable insights into the unique role and needs of community banks as you invest in your communities. We have benefited from the ICBA's engagement on CRA both in the form of detailed comment letters and through a number of meetings to discuss different aspects of CRA reform. We thank you for your robust engagement and trust that you see your input reflected in the ANPR. Throughout our outreach, we consistently heard from both bankers and community groups that they value the CRA and that they want to see it improved and updated. This was important feedback as we contemplated how to modernize the regulations, while still staying true to the core purpose of the statute to meet the broad range of banking needs in low- and moderate-income (LMI) communities and address inequities in credit access. Our first major goal for the ANPR was to strengthen the regulations in alignment with the CRA statute. This means strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of LMI banking needs are being met. It also entails promoting financial inclusion by, among other things, providing credit for activities in areas with unmet needs outside of assessment areas, such as Indian Country. Additionally, we aim to create incentives for investment in minority depository institutions and community development financial institutions, many of whom are ICBA members. We know that banking has evolved over the past 25 years, so we also sought to update standards in light of changes to banking over time, including mobile and internet banking. Lastly, we wanted to continue to promote community engagement to inform the examination process. Our second major goal for the ANPR was to provide greater certainty, tailor regulations, and minimize burden. The ANPR seeks feedback on several approaches designed to make the rules clearer, more transparent, and less subjective. For example, the proposed metrics for the retail test and the community development test would provide more clarity and transparency on how bank ratings are determined. In talking with community banks, Federal Reserve staff and I also heard about the need for clearer standards and greater limitations on the size of assessment areas—especially for small banks operating just in a portion of a large county or only making a few loans in a part of a county. The ANPR offers ideas to provide greater clarity in response to these concerns. Importantly, the ANPR proposes to tailor CRA to bank size and business model. In discussing CRA reform with bankers and community organizations, it has been clear that there is a need for a tailored approach for small banks and better outcomes for rural communities. I am encouraged that the ANPR offers ideas that advance these objectives. So let me say a bit more about the proposals in the ANPR that are tailored to small banks. Small retail banks could continue to have their retail lending activities evaluated under the current framework, or they could elect to be evaluated under the proposed retail lending metric. Small banks that opt for the retail lending metric can also elect to have other activities considered. Additionally, the ANPR minimizes data collection and reporting burden by relying on existing data as much as possible, as well as exempting small banks from deposit and certain other data collection requirements. We also heard from stakeholders like ICBA that rural areas, and banks in rural areas, have particular needs. Therefore, the ANPR proposes providing incentives for banks in rural areas to participate in beneficial civic and other nonprofit activities (e.g., serving on a board of a civic institution) that may not have a primary purpose of community development. In rural areas, bank participation in these kinds of activities can make a difference in supporting economic development. The ANPR also seeks feedback on providing CRA credit for bank volunteer activities in rural areas that do not involve the provision of financial or related services but have a clear community development purpose and greatly impact local communities, like helping to build affordable housing. Our final major goal of the ANPR is to provide a foundation for the agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders such as the ICBA have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing an appropriately long period for public comment, we hope the ANPR advances the goal of building a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has the broad support of stakeholders. All three regulators have benefited from stakeholder input provided through comment letters, roundtables, and meetings. There is significant interagency agreement on the objectives of CRA reform, and many of the ideas in the ANPR reflect interagency discussions and regulatory proposals. In closing, we look forward to modernizing the CRA in a way that strengthens the regulations to advance the core purposes of the statute, while providing greater certainty, tailoring regulations, and minimizing burden. We have appreciated the ICBA's strong engagement throughout this process, and we look forward to your continued engagement as we seek to converge on a consistent approach that has broad stakeholder support. Thank you. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts, Nancy Riley, and Joseph Firschein of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Independent Community Bankers of America, "Data Show Community Banks Lead Economic Recovery," news release, August 19, 2020. Also see, Michelle W. Bowman, "Community Banks Rise to the Challenge" (speech at the "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, September 30, 2020).Return to text 3. See Federal Reserve Board, "Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: the Community Reinvestment Act (PDF)," (September 21, 2020).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Opportunities and Challenges for Homeownership," a Virtual Roundtable Discussion, Jake Jabs College of Business and Entrepreneurship, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana (via webcast) Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you to Montana State University (MSU) for hosting today's event and for that very kind introduction. It is wonderful to see the success of your Community Banking Program here at MSU and your commitment to investing in the education of future generations of community bankers. Throughout the response to the pandemic, community bankers have continued to serve as the primary source of credit to small businesses and have continued to provide economic and financial support to communities across our nation. Young people, like all of you engaged in this program, will very likely become the future leaders of these institutions, which are critical to their communities and to our economy and financial system. One of the most significant challenges facing community bankers today is navigating the complex regulatory framework. One area that has become more complicated is a line of business that has traditionally been the foundation for community banking, home mortgage lending. Community bank leaders consistently tell me that significant regulatory burden related to making home mortgages has been a major reason they have scaled back their mortgage lending activities or exited the market altogether. Along with tightened lending standards, this trend has made it harder for middle- and lower-income borrowers to obtain mortgage credit since the global financial crisis. Fortunately, work is under way to relieve that burden, and I will highlight one effort in particular. But before I do, let me provide some context by reviewing the current state of the economy and its effect on homeowners and would-be homeowners. The COVID-19 Pandemic and Homeownership in the U.S.The COVID-19 pandemic is having a profound effect on individuals and families across the U.S. and throughout the world. While a strong recovery has begun, it is clear that there is still a way to go before we are back to the robust economy we experienced at the beginning of the year. These challenges are affecting homeowners and the lenders that provide credit to support them. Many homeowners who have lost a job or have had their income affected by economic conditions have been able to work with their lenders, but such help may not be a long-term solution for many borrowers. Fortunately, the housing market as a whole is a bright spot for the economy. Higher home prices are improving the balance sheets of many households, even those that may face income and employment challenges, and new construction activity is generating new job opportunities. While affordability remains an important consideration, it is encouraging that housing has performed well in response to low interest rates. Mortgage Regulations and Access to Mortgage CreditHowever, even during this period of strong performance in the housing market, access to affordable mortgage credit remains a barrier to homeownership for some borrowers, due in part to regulatory burden. Since the last financial crisis more than a decade ago, there have been a number of new mortgage regulations that added requirements for both borrowers and lenders. While many of these requirements have contributed to a safer and more consumer-friendly mortgage market, they have also introduced significant paperwork and delays that can present roadblocks for many borrowers. These new rules have also made it more difficult and costly for small banks to originate mortgage loans, leading many community banks to scale back on home lending activity or abandon it altogether. Homeownership is as important to communities as it is to individuals, and access to credit for rural and low-to-moderate income communities often depends on community banks. In many communities, especially rural communities, if the local bank has been forced out of mortgage lending due to burdensome regulation, it means little or no access to mortgage credit, preventing buyers from financing home purchases and homeowners from selling their homes. Many leaders of small community banks have told me that the compliance costs for originating smaller mortgages are prohibitive, and that the staffing and training required to meet the strict requirements are extraordinary in relation to the limited number of mortgages they originate. As one state banking commissioner said to me recently, "It doesn't make a lot of sense that you can make an $80,000 truck loan on two sides of a sheet of paper, but that many, many pages of paperwork are required to make a $40,000 loan on a mobile home or trailer." In fact, I have been told by community bankers that they are sometimes compelled to make loans for lower-priced home purchases that are backed by other collateral, such as a car or equipment, because of the excessive burden of complying with the many residential home mortgage regulations and time frames for such small transactions. As a result, these consumers may not have the benefit of the important consumer protections that having a home mortgage loan provides. Reducing mortgage compliance burden would allow community banks to better meet the critical need for home lending in their communities. Because of their local knowledge and strong customer relationships, community banks are often more willing to work with borrowers to get through difficult times. Taking steps to simplify and lower this regulatory burden for small community banks and their customers would help to ensure that homeowners can stay in their homes during times of stress, like the one we are facing currently due to COVID-19. One Area to Consider in Easing BurdenThe TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure, or TRID, is one of the real estate regulatory requirements that smaller banks cite most frequently as creating a heavy burden. Commissioner Melanie Hall and the Montana Independent Bankers have been particularly helpful in highlighting the importance of this issue. Therefore, I am very pleased that the Independent Community Bankers of America is engaged in ongoing conversations and activities to address the more burdensome aspects of this requirement on community banks while importantly retaining key consumer protections. Efforts like these that aim to reduce the compliance burden for critically important services will enable many community banks to return to doing what they do best: meeting the needs of their communities. Again, thank you for inviting me to join you today, and I look forward to engaging on this important topic.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the National Association for Business Economics Virtual Annual Meeting Good morning. It has been just eight months since the pandemic first gained a foothold on our shores, bringing with it the sharpest downturn on record, as well as the most forceful policy response in living memory. Although it is too early for definitive conclusions, today I will offer a current assessment of the response to the economic fallout of this historic event and discuss the path ahead. The Pre-COVID EconomyAs the coronavirus spread across the globe, the U.S. economy was in its 128th month of expansion—the longest in our recorded history—and was generally in a strong position. Moderate growth continued at a slightly above-trend pace. Labor market conditions were strong across a range of measures. The unemployment rate was running at 50-year lows. PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation was running just below our 2 percent target. The economy did face longer-term challenges, as all economies do. Labor force participation among people in their prime working years had been trending down since the turn of the millennium, and productivity gains during the expansion were disappointing. Income and wealth disparities had been growing for several decades. As the expansion continued its long run, however, productivity started to pick up, the labor market strengthened, and the benefits of growth began to be more widely shared. In particular, improved labor market conditions during the past few years encouraged more prime-age workers to rejoin or remain in the labor force. Meanwhile, real wage gains for all workers picked up, especially for those in lower paying jobs. Most economic forecasters expected the expansion and its benefits to continue, and with good reason. There was no economy-threatening asset bubble to pop and no unsustainable boom to bust. While nonfinancial business leverage appeared to be elevated, leverage in the household sector was moderate. The banking system was strong, with robust levels of capital and liquidity. The COVID-19 recession was unusual in that it was not triggered by a buildup of financial or economic imbalances. Instead, the pandemic shock was essentially a case of a natural disaster hitting a healthy economy. Given the condition of the economy, in the early stages of the crisis it seemed plausible that, with a rapid, forceful, and sustained policy response, many sectors of the economy would be able to bounce back strongly once the virus was under control. That response would need to come from actions across all levels of government, from health and fiscal authorities, and from the Federal Reserve. It also seemed likely that the sectors most affected by the pandemic—those relying on extensive in-person contact—would face a long and difficult path to recovery. These sectors and people working in them would likely need targeted and sustained policy support. Some asked what the Fed could do to address what was essentially a medical emergency. We identified three ways that our tools could help limit the economic damage from the pandemic: providing stability and relief during the acute phase of the crisis when much of the economy was shut down; vigorously supporting the expansion when it came; and doing what we could to limit longer-run damage to the productive capacity of the economy. The Recession and Nascent RecoveryWhen it became clear in late February that the disease was spreading worldwide, financial markets were roiled by a global flight to cash. By the end of the month, many important markets were faltering, raising the threat of a financial crisis that could exacerbate the economic fallout of the pandemic. Widespread economic shutdowns began in March, and in the United States, with many sectors shut down or operating well below capacity, real GDP fell 31 percent in the second quarter on an annualized basis. Employers slashed payrolls by 22 million, with those on temporary layoff rising by 17 million. Broader measures of labor market conditions, such as labor force participation and those working part time for economic reasons, showed further damage. In response, we deployed the full range of tools at our disposal, cutting rates to their effective lower bound; conducting unprecedented quantities of asset purchases; and establishing a range of emergency lending facilities to restore market function and support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. We also implemented targeted and temporary measures to allow banks to better support their customers. The fiscal response was truly extraordinary. The unanimous passage of the CARES Act and three other bills passed with broad support in March and April established wide-ranging programs that are expected to provide roughly $3 trillion in economic support overall—by far the largest and most innovative fiscal response to an economic crisis since the Great Depression. What have these policies managed to accomplish so far? First, the substantial fiscal aid has given vital support to households. The rise in transfers supported necessary spending and contributed to a sharp increase in household saving. Goods consumption is now above its pre-pandemic level. Services consumption remains low, although it seems likely that much of this weakness is the byproduct of health concerns and social distancing, rather than reductions in income and wealth. Consumption held up well through August after the expiration of expanded unemployment insurance benefits, indicating that savings from transfer payments continue to support economic activity. A recent Fed survey showed that households in July had surprisingly upbeat views of their current financial well-being, with 77 percent of adults either "doing okay" or "living comfortably," an improvement even over the reading immediately preceding the pandemic.1Still, since it appears that many will undergo extended periods of unemployment, there is likely to be a need for further support. Second, aid to firms—in particular, the Paycheck Protection Program—and the general boost to aggregate demand have so far partly forestalled an expected wave of bankruptcies and lessened permanent layoffs. Business investment appears to be on a renewed upward trajectory and new business formation similarly appears to be rebounding, pointing to some confidence in the path ahead. Third, after briefly seizing up in March, financial markets have largely returned to normal functioning, albeit in the context of extensive ongoing policy support. Financial conditions are highly accommodative, and credit is available on reasonable terms for many—though not all—households and businesses. Interest-sensitive spending has been relatively strong, as shown in the housing and auto sectors. Taken together, fiscal and monetary policy actions have so far supported a strong but incomplete recovery in demand and have—for now—substantially muted the normal recessionary dynamics that occur in a downturn. In a typical recession, there is a downward spiral in which layoffs lead to still lower demand, and subsequent additional layoffs. This dynamic was disrupted by the infusion of funds to households and businesses. Prompt and forceful policy actions were also likely responsible for reducing risk aversion in financial markets and business decisions more broadly. While the combined effects of fiscal and monetary policy have aided the solid recovery of the labor market so far, there is still a long way to go. Payrolls have now recovered roughly half of the 22 million decline. After rising to 14.7 percent in April, the unemployment rate is back to 7.9 percent, clearly a significant and rapid rebound. A broader measure that better captures current labor market conditions—by adjusting for mistaken characterizations of job status, and for the decline in labor force participation since February—is running around 11 percent. The burdens of the downturn have not been evenly shared. The initial job losses fell most heavily on lower-wage workers in service industries facing the public—job categories in which minorities and women are overrepresented. In August, employment of those in the bottom quartile of the wage distribution was still 21 percent below its February level, while it was only 4 percent lower for other workers.2Combined with the disproportionate effects of COVID on communities of color, and the overwhelming burden of childcare during quarantine and distance learning, which has fallen mostly on women, the pandemic is further widening divides in wealth and economic mobility. The Road AheadI will now turn to the outlook. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected. The most recent projections by FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee) participants at our September meeting show the recovery continuing at a solid pace. The median participant saw unemployment declining to 4 percent and inflation reaching 2 percent by the end of 2023. Of course, the economy may perform better or worse than expected. The outlook remains highly uncertain, in part because it depends on controlling the spread and effects of the virus. There is a risk that the rapid initial gains from reopening may transition to a longer than expected slog back to full recovery as some segments struggle with the pandemic's continued fallout. The pace of economic improvement has moderated since the outsize gains of May and June, as is evident in employment, income, and spending data. The increase in permanent job loss, as well as recent layoffs, are also notable. We should continue do what we can to manage downside risks to the outlook. One such risk is that COVID-19 cases might again rise to levels that more significantly limit economic activity, not to mention the tragic effects on lives and well-being. Managing this risk as the expansion continues will require following medical experts' guidance, including using masks and social-distancing measures. A second risk is that a prolonged slowing in the pace of improvement over time could trigger typical recessionary dynamics, as weakness feeds on weakness. A long period of unnecessarily slow progress could continue to exacerbate existing disparities in our economy. That would be tragic, especially in light of our country's progress on these issues in the years leading up to the pandemic. The expansion is still far from complete. At this early stage, I would argue that the risks of policy intervention are still asymmetric. Too little support would lead to a weak recovery, creating unnecessary hardship for households and businesses. Over time, household insolvencies and business bankruptcies would rise, harming the productive capacity of the economy, and holding back wage growth. By contrast, the risks of overdoing it seem, for now, to be smaller. Even if policy actions ultimately prove to be greater than needed, they will not go to waste. The recovery will be stronger and move faster if monetary policy and fiscal policy continue to work side by side to provide support to the economy until it is clearly out of the woods. Given this audience, I would be remiss were I not to mention our review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications, which concluded recently with our adoption of a flexible average inflation-targeting regime. My colleagues and I have discussed this new framework in detail in recent remarks. Today I will just note that the underlying structure of the economy changes over time, and that the FOMC's framework for conducting monetary policy must keep pace. The recent changes to our consensus statement reflect our evolving understanding of several important developments. There has been a decline in estimates of the potential or longer-run growth rate of the economy and in the general level of interest rates, presenting challenges for the ability of monetary policy to respond to a downturn. On a more positive note, we have seen that the economy can sustain historically high levels of employment, bringing significant societal benefits and without causing a troubling rise in inflation. The new consensus statement acknowledges these developments and makes appropriate changes in our monetary policy framework to position the FOMC to best achieve its statutory goals. The forward rate guidance adopted at our September meeting reflects our new consensus statement. The new guidance says that, with inflation running persistently below our longer-run 2 percent goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee also left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 0 to 1/4 percent, and it expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels that are consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. We expect that the new framework and guidance will support our efforts in pursuit of a strong economic recovery. Thank you. I look forward to our discussion. 1. SeeUpdate on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households: July 2020 Results,or SHED, issued in September 2020 and available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-report-economic-well-being-us-households-update-202009.pdf.Return to text 2. Using data from ADP, the Board staff estimate that at the end of April, 41 percent of the workers in the bottom quartile (based on their previous wage) had lost their jobs, compared with only 13 percent for the other three quartiles. See the Board's June 2020Monetary Policy Report,available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20200612_mprfullreport.pdf, for more details.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Hoover Institution, Stanford, California, via webcast I want to thank John Taylor and the Hoover Institution for inviting me to speak today. I will start with some brief remarks about the current economic situation and monetary policy and then turn to the actions that the Federal Reserve has taken this year to help ensure that the banking system remains a source of strength during the recovery from the COVID event, the term I use for the complex set of responses in both the private and public sectors to the outbreak of COVID-19. I will close with some thoughts on nonbank financial institutions and international coordination. Although the COVID event put the U.S. economy in a deep hole, the recovery since the economy began reopening in May has been stronger than almost any forecaster predicted back in the spring. Spurred in part by record fiscal stimulus, both business and household spending appear to have bounced back significantly through the third quarter, and we have regained about half of the jobs lost in March and April. I attribute a good portion of that strength to the inherent dynamism and flexibility of the American economy. Although the COVID event continues to stress businesses, many businesses adjusted their operations to remain open, and applications for new businesses surged over the summer. Meanwhile, better treatments and more-targeted containment measures focused on protecting the most vulnerable have resulted in falling rates of hospitalization and mortality. Therefore, I am optimistic that the recovery from the COVID event will continue to be robust. Of course, while we're doing better than expected, we still have a ways to go. The labor market remains deeply depressed, and employment is far short of the Federal Reserve's maximum employment goal. We are also keenly aware that the harm from higher unemployment has fallen even more than usual on those low-income households least able to bear it. Some businesses, particularly those in high-contact and personal-service industries, largely have been left out of the recovery. Inflation is well below our 2 percent longer-run goal, and some measures of inflation expectations have ticked down. Therefore, at the September Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, I voted in favor of the new and clearer forward guidance for monetary policy because it will provide additional support for the recovery.1Indeed, interest-rate and credit-sensitive sectors—business spending, home sales, auto sales, and other "big-ticket" items—have helped fuel that recovery. This spending was supported by our timely and forceful moves to cut the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound, restore market functioning, and provide emergency support to households and businesses through 13(3) emergency lending facilities. Which leads me to the banking industry. For monetary policy to fully support Main Street, we need a well-capitalized, stable banking system that is lending to creditworthy households and businesses. Since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the Federal Reserve has focused on building the resiliency of banks so that they would be a source of strength during the next downturn. Thus far, that plan has borne a great deal of fruit. As the crisis intensified in early March, banks stepped into the breach and met the massive demands for cash from businesses that drew on their preexisting credit lines. Banks also funded the bulk of the more than $500 billion in Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans. According to our weekly bank credit data, commercial and industrial loans increased $715 billion between the week of February 26th and their peak on May 13th.2For millions of struggling households, banks have agreed to forbear interest and principal payments on their loans. In addition, through September, banks absorbed more than $1.2 trillion of central bank reserves and received about $2.5 trillion of core deposits from investors who sought the safe haven of the U.S. dollar and insured bank accounts. As supervisors, we recognized that these actions strained the balance-sheet capacity of banks and so have taken a number of steps to allow them to continue to support their customers during this unprecedented time. A number of those steps—such as encouraging banks to work with their customers until the emergency subsides—are consistent with what we do whenever there is a natural disaster that disrupts normal commerce. But the COVID event has affected the entire country at the same time, requiring a broad set of extraordinary actions. For instance, we have temporarily exempted reserves and Treasury securities from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio so that banks do not become constrained by growing Treasury issuance and central bank reserves and can support businesses and households.3More broadly, we have reintroduced and added numerous funding facilities through our 13(3) authority to support the continued flow of credit in the economy.4 Throughout all this, U.S. banks have remained financially healthy. Second-quarter data showed that most banks were profitable, aggregate capital ratios increased, and banks continued to maintain ample levels of liquidity. In addition, banks added substantially to their loan loss reserves over the first half of 2020, providing additional resilience. This week, some of the largest institutions have begun to report that their profitability held up again in the third quarter, partly because their robust provisions for loan losses earlier this year limited the need for additional provisions this quarter. Going forward, we will want to be sure that banks remain a source of strength and support for the economy. Even with the economic recovery being stronger and faster than expected, there are certainly reasons to be vigilant. Interest rates are likely to remain very low for quite some time, putting downward pressure on banks' net interest margins and their profitability more generally. The high level of corporate debt and elevated valuations in commercial real estate going into this crisis, combined with prolonged uncertainties and changes in the way we shop and work, could lead to higher-than-expected losses on loans to some of these businesses. Consumer lending and residential mortgages seem to be holding up well so far, which may reflect the relatively high quality of household credit going into the COVID event. However, the performance of these loans also needs to be watched closely in light of the forbearance policymakers have encouraged and the possibility of a reduction in fiscal support for households. For the past decade, robust stress testing has been at the core of our strategy for ensuring that our largest banks have sufficient capital to meet the credit needs of their customers while weathering an extreme downturn. In making decisions about our stress tests this year, I have been guided by three principles: First, we want to make sure that our supervisory and regulatory actions do not exacerbate the fallout from what was the most extreme deterioration in economic conditions on record. Second, we want to jealously guard the credibility of our stress tests, which restored confidence in banks during the GFC and have helped maintain that confidence since. Third, we want to establish the precedent that our response to a crisis would remain as deliberate, data driven, and bank specific as could be done prudently. Therefore, once it was apparent that our initial stress test scenarios for 2020—which were released before the pandemic—had been overtaken by events, we conducted a suite of additional analyses to assess the sensitivity of this year's results.5This comprehensive analysis included consideration of banks' vulnerabilities under three additional downside scenarios that were very severe even given how gloomy the picture looked this spring. The staff also incorporated a number of conservative assumptions about the balance sheet changes that we saw at the end of the first quarter. This analysis found that the banking system would experience substantial losses under those highly adverse conditions but remain well capitalized in the aggregate. However, individual bank outcomes across the three scenarios varied significantly. The variation in those outcomes highlighted the considerable uncertainty in the economic outlook at the time and how that would translate to banking conditions in coming quarters. Accordingly, we required banks to resubmit their capital plans and took several actions to preserve capital in the interim. For the third quarter, the Board required large banks to suspend all stock repurchases, capped their dividends, and placed a second limit based on individual banks earnings. The limitation of share repurchases, which accounted for 70 percent of all capital distributions at large banks in recent years, by itself led to a meaningful preservation of capital among large banks. The dividend restrictions guarded against capital depletion in the event that some banks experienced unexpectedly large losses, while still allowing firms that could support them to pay out dividends. Late last month, the Board extended the distribution limitations onto the fourth quarter amid the continued uncertainty. The Federal Reserve is currently conducting another round of stress tests, using two new severe downside scenarios published last month, and will release bank-specific results from both scenarios before the end of the year.6 Taken together, these actions will preserve capital in the system during this highly uncertain time. As I noted, I also hope that the process we followed to arrive at these decisions will affirm that our actions, even in a crisis, will be dictated by the most comprehensive analysis we can do in a timely manner and will be as tailored to individual institutions' condition as is feasible given the circumstances. While banks so far have been resilient to the shock from the COVID event, the same cannot be said for important parts of the system of nonbank financial intermediation (NBFI). Starting in March, Federal Reserve facilities were needed to contain pressures in some prime money market funds, as well as, to a lesser extent, in certain long-term mutual funds that invest in corporate debt. Other types of NBFI also struggled during that period, including nonbank mortgage servicers and real estate investment trusts, the latter of which received support from the Board's decision to, for the first time, purchase agency commercial mortgage–backed securities.7 The vulnerabilities of NBFI are also at the top of the mind of international regulators. The Financial Stability Board's (FSB) annual report on NBFI indicates that the NBFI sector is now almost 50 percent of total financial intermediation, and many NBFIs rely on the banking system for credit and backstop liquidity.8Thus, late last year, I formed a high-level steering group of central bankers, market regulators, and international organizations to oversee the FSB work on nonbank finance and to help coordinate work across the range of global standard setting bodies that oversee the financial sector. The group is currently completing a holistic review of the COVID event to better understand the role that vulnerabilities stemming from the NBFI sector played in those events. In the wake of the COVID event, we have made good progress in arriving at a shared diagnosis of the market turmoil that happened during the onset of the event in March. Our discussions have surfaced a number of issues associated with particular types of market participants and mechanisms that may have caused liquidity imbalances and propagated stress. They include: vulnerabilities in money market funds (as I discussed earlier); dealers' capacity and willingness to intermediate; market structure in the core government bond markets and, potentially, the role of leveraged investors; and fragilities in US dollar cross-border funding. We are looking at the role that each of these factors may have played, but we are not yet prepared to say "J'accuse" to any one of them. This is because our work has also reinforced the point that one needs to examine the system as a whole and take into account the various linkages within nonbank financial intermediation and between nonbanks and banks. We will provide to the G20 Summit next month our holistic review of the turmoil and a concrete set of proposals for follow-up work on NBFI. This will provide a basis for a work plan for 2021, focused on better understanding this critical sector, vulnerabilities related to it, and how we might take a more macroprudential approach to supervising and regulating at least some parts of this sector. Thanks again to the Hoover Institution for having me, and I look forward to the discussion that follows. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,"press release, September 16, 2020.Return to text 2."Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States - H.8,"last modified October 9, 2020.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board Announces Temporary Change to Its Supplementary Leverage Ratio Rule to Ease Strains in the Treasury Market Resulting from the Coronavirus and Increase Banking Organizations' Ability to Provide Credit to Households and Businesses,"press release, April 1, 2020.Return to text 4."Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),"Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last modified, April 30, 2020.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Assessment of Bank Capital during the Recent Coronavirus Event(PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, June 2020).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervisory Scenarios for the Resubmission of Capital Plans in the Fourth Quarter of 2020(Washington: Board of Governors, September 2020).Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement,"press release, March 23, 2020.Return to text 8. Financial Stability Board."FSB Publishes Annual Report on Nonbank Financial Intermediation,"press release, January 19, 2020.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association Annual Meeting (via webcast) Thank you for the invitation to be with you today. The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) annual conference covers a broad spectrum of issues that are timely and relevant to the current work of the Financial Stability Board, or FSB, and I am grateful for the opportunity to be part of it. The shocks related to COVID-19 and the associated containment measures, which I refer to as the "COVID Event," have sharpened the FSB's focus on the role of capital provision, the functioning of financial markets, and different aspects of nonbank financial intermediation, or NBFI for short. The FSB's annual NBFI monitoring report estimates that the sector now accounts for almost 50 percent of total financial intermediation globally, up sharply in the last decade. With this growth has come greater interconnectedness. Many NBFIs rely on the banking system for credit and backstop liquidity. The interconnectedness of our financial system means that it is not enough to understand the vulnerabilities arising from the banking sector. We must also understand vulnerabilities in the nonbank sector and how shocks are transmitted to or from the nonbank sector. To address this need for a broader perspective, last year I formed a high-level steering group of central bankers and market regulators to oversee the FSB's work on nonbank finance and to help coordinate with various global financial standard-setting bodies. The COVID Event in March tested the resilience of the financial system, and the NBFI steering group has used the past few months to begin identifying the parts of the NBFI sector that did not exhibit sufficient resiliency. While our analysis is not final, the group is currently completing a holistic review of the impact the COVID Event had on financial markets in March, especially dislocations in key funding markets and credit supply, to better understand the role that vulnerabilities stemming from the NBFI sector played. Today, I want to share with you some of the emerging elements of the FSB's review of the COVID Event, primarily how the shock moved through the financial system and which critical vulnerabilities it exposed. I also want to outline further work that the FSB plans to conduct in light of this experience, including a more in-depth assessment of how various segments of the NBFI sector performed. Going forward, I expect the NBFI sector to be an ongoing focus of the FSB. The Global Financial System and Economy Prior to the ShockWhen COVID-19 emerged early this year, the global financial system was in several ways fundamentally different than it was at the outset of the financial crisis of more than a decade ago. Regulatory reforms implemented in response to that crisis, changes in technology, developments in U.S. dollar funding, and, importantly, the growth of NBFI all contributed to a changed landscape. Beyond the growth of the NBFI sector, there has also been considerable change within this sector. Business models and financial services provided by NBFIs have become more diverse. This variation can be seen in new products, services, and financial models. New types of markets—for example, private debt markets—and new forms of intermediation, such as fintech credit, have sprung up. Investments by nonbank entities in certain credit products, such as fixed income exchange traded funds and collateralized loan obligations, and participation in some credit segments, such as mortgage and consumer finance, has grown. Change is also evident in how the sector operates in different jurisdictions. For example, provision of credit by nonbank fintech lenders varies greatly across FSB member jurisdictions. In sum, nonbanks now play a larger and more diverse role in financing the real economy and managing the savings of households and companies. The past decade also saw an evolution in the global U.S. dollar funding landscape. While the U.S. economy forms a smaller percentage of global gross domestic product than in the past, the U.S. dollar still dominates international finance as a funding and investment currency, and its widespread use has given rise to a complex and geographically dispersed network of financial relationships. This means global economic and financial activity is highly dependent on the ability of U.S. dollar funding to flow smoothly and efficiently between users. In contrast to bank intermediation, market-based financing in U.S. dollars has outpaced the growth of the global economy. Nonbank institutions—such as insurers, pension funds, and central counterparties—have become more important users of U.S. dollar funding, though they lack access to funding backstops, such as central bank facilities, in times of stress. Cross-border links between banks and nonbank entities have also increased, and there has been a shift of global portfolios toward U.S. securities and cross-border lending into emerging market economies (EMEs), much of which is in U.S. dollars. Changes in the functioning of financial markets have also affected how the financial system provides liquidity and transmits price changes, and many of the recent changes stem from the increased role of nonbank players. In markets with more standardized products, electronic trading has grown, increasing the use of high-frequency trading and the role of principal trading firms in providing liquidity. By contrast, other markets, such as funding markets for corporate credit, have grown significantly in size but continue to be traded over-the-counter with low levels of automated trading. The COVID Shock and Its PropagationThe outbreak of COVID-19 and efforts to contain it generated simultaneous hits to aggregate supply and demand. Voluntary and mandated quarantines, lockdowns, and social distancing efforts lowered aggregate demand, caused large job losses, and sharply increased uncertainty. Workplaces closed and travel was curtailed, disrupting global supply chains. Important sectors of the global economy, such as tourism and transportation, came to a rapid stop. As the concern about the virus spread, these effects grew. According to figures from the International Monetary Fund, we ultimately wound up with the deepest and broadest global recession since the Great Depression.1 The "Dash for Cash"As businesses scrambled to remain liquid amidst this global "sudden stop," demand for liquidity in U.S. dollars increased globally. Commercial entities with debt denominated in U.S. dollars sought to increase their holdings of U.S. dollars. Unprecedented asset price volatility and record or near-record trading volumes led to significant margin calls, which amplified the demand for cash. Some market participants may not have anticipated the size of these margin calls, and they were forced to sell less liquid assets rapidly to meet them. Those forced sales on top of other pricing pressures, resulted in unwanted procyclicality. Traditional sources of cash were unable to handle the significant and sudden increase in demand. Normally, market participants can generate cash by converting assets to cash in secured funding markets or by issuing debt. Through late February and early March, as the COVID Event began to unfold in Europe, these mechanisms mostly functioned as expected. However, only a few days, the surge in demand for cash—apparently triggered by the World Health Organization's designation of the virus as a global pandemic on March 11 and simultaneous lockdowns in a number of countries—overwhelmed dealers and impaired price discovery. Repurchase rates increased sharply and liquidity in securities markets declined precipitously. Bid-ask spreads increased, in some cases to levels greater than those observed during the global financial crisis. As traditional sources of liquidity became limited, market participants had to either pay a premium for cash, or search for it in other ways. A Surprise in Government Bond MarketsOne alarming feature of the COVID Event involved the way in which the shock propagated through core government bond markets. Amid increased demand for cash and short-dated assets, institutional investors sold large volumes of longer-dated bonds—including those usually considered as most liquid—in favor of cash. The price of government bonds relative to futures prices decoupled, putting significant volumes of derivatives trades out of the money and thereby increasing margin calls. Global authorities sold a significant number of government bonds, perhaps to satisfy U.S. dollar funding needs or to stabilize foreign exchange rates. All together, the pressure on longer-dated government bonds was sufficient to impair pricing for some of these bonds in this normally deep and liquid market, an outcome that we would not normally expect. Negative Feedback LoopsThe mismatch last spring in the demand and supply of cash exhibited some self-reinforcing tendencies. As market participants became more risk averse and hoarded liquidity, they became unwilling to provide short-term unsecured funding. Dealers reached their limits in holding large amounts of securities—in some cases internal risk limits, in other cases limits imposed by regulation—rendering them unable or unwilling to absorb significant asset sales from other market participants. As companies were increasingly unable to gain access to traditional sources of liquidity, they turned to banks and drew on credit lines, decreasing cash held by banks that they could have used for other lending. Stresses in debt markets also fed into one another. Widespread forced sales of securities, combined with limited dealer intermediation contributed to increased volatility and illiquidity. In particular, the increased volatility led to margin calls, further increasing the demand for liquid assets. All of these pressures increased the demand for cash, which increasingly was only available by selling assets. The volume of sales was sufficient to impair pricing in certain markets, starting the cycle anew. The sharp reduction in market liquidity likely exacerbated asset price declines, and it may have hindered other investors from behaving in a countercyclical fashion by purchasing under-valued assets. U.S. Money Market FundsLet me focus briefly on U.S. money market funds, specifically prime and tax-exempt funds, as an example of how some of these strains played out during the COVID Event. Money market funds are perceived as very safe and liquid investments by most financial market participants, and yet in the COVID event and in the earlier global financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasury were compelled to create significant government backstops to contain runs on these funds that had the potential to destabilize the financial system. The crux of the issue stems from the fact that investors run from these money market funds in times of stress. In 2008, investors ran from money funds in part because of the first-mover advantage created by their stable net asset values (NAVs); in 2020, investors appear to have run from money funds in part because of fears of impending redemption fees or redemption suspensions. In March of 2020, among institutional prime money market funds offered publically as well as retail prime funds, the pace of outflows actually exceeded that in the fall of 2008.2 Those outflows from money funds increased stress in short-term funding markets. Conditions in markets for commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs) began to deteriorate rapidly, and spreads for money market instruments jumped to levels not seen since the last financial crisis. InterventionIn the COVID Event, one advantage the public sector had was the experience of the global financial crisis which helped us act quickly and decisively to halt a further intensification of the market shock. These interventions were unprecedented in scale and scope. Central banks around the world expanded their asset purchases, significantly increasing their balance sheets. Central banks also implemented liquidity support, including traditional operations to fund banks, but also through liquidity facilities to support other entities. For example, the Federal Reserve established facilities to provide liquidity to dealers, commercial paper markets, money funds, nonfinancial corporates, and municipal bond markets. In an effort to support the global demand for U.S. dollars, the Federal Reserve established swap lines with central banks all over the world to support international trade. In addition, regulators and supervisors have strongly encouraged banks to deploy capital and liquidity buffers to support lending, made modifications to certain regulatory requirements, or delayed the implementation of new requirements. These decisive actions have succeeded in alleviating market strains to date. The Path ForwardWhile swift and decisive policy action succeeded in calming markets, this does not mean that our work is complete. While central bank action succeeded in restoring market functioning, this support does not address the underlying vulnerabilities spotlighted by the COVID Event. The COVID Event revealed a banking system that withstood this shock quite well with limited official sector support, and a nonbank system that was significantly more fragile. By this measure, the COVID Event demonstrates that we have work to do. The FSB is in the early stages of this work. In November, we will deliver to the G20 Summit, and publish, our holistic review of the COVID Event. The report will provide a diagnosis of the shock from a financial stability perspective, including how it was absorbed and amplified. The report also will identify areas where policy consideration may be warranted. Recognizing the critical importance of the interconnections between the banking and NBFI sectors, the FSB set up a working group to map the current financial system, including the bank and NBFI sectors and the links among and between the two. This exercise will identify nodes and channels of risk transmission in the system, which will also help policymakers identify and understand the pathways for both amplification and absorption of risk in the financial system. Further, the FSB's initial analysis on the beginning stages of the COVID Event has revealed a number of issues that may have caused liquidity imbalances or propagated stress. For example, there are signs that margin calls were larger than expected and may have stretched the liquidity of some market participants. Questions about the functioning and resilience of the core government funding markets also remain, especially in relation to the role of leveraged investors and dealer capacity to intermediate in these markets. We know already that work needs to be done to improve the resiliency of money market funds beforethe vulnerabilities in these funds amplify another shock. This will require careful consideration of financial stability, investor protection, and efficiency objectives alongside an understanding of the benefits of money market funds that should be preserved. Additionally, other types of open-ended funds, especially those invested in less liquid assets, also experienced large outflows, and further work is likely needed to understand liquidity risks in these funds. I believe that, as with the work undertaken in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the FSB will provide a forum for international experts to understand vulnerabilities in NBFIs, promptly prescribe reasonable policy solutions, and monitor the implementation and effectiveness of any agreed-upon reforms. ConclusionGlobal coordination through the FSB has helped reveal a number of issues associated with particular types of market participants and mechanisms that may have caused liquidity imbalances and propagated stress. Since the start of the pandemic, FSB members regularly connected to share experiences, analyses, and concerns about coming events. In so doing, the membership as a whole has been agile, coordinated, and quick to respond. We have seen that decisive action helped to stabilize markets through facilitating funding to support the economy. Addressing vulnerabilities in the financial system going forward, therefore, will require a holistic perspective given the various linkages within nonbank financial intermediation and between nonbanks and banks. We have gained some clarity regarding areas of the market that needed significant bolstering and have to look closely at whether and how resilience in these segments can be improved. Next month, when the FSB delivers our NBFI report and proposals to the G20 Summit, we will be doing what the FSB does best: leveraging the strength of our broad and diverse membership to provide a clear path forward to strengthen the resilience of the global financial system. 1. See International Monetary Fund,World Economic Outlook Update(Washington: International Monetary Fund, June 2020); global growth is projected at -4.9 percent in 2020, which would leave 2021 GDP some 6-1/2 percentage points lower than in the pre-COVID-19 projections of January 2020.Return to text 2. With respect to institutional prime money market funds, outflows as a fraction of the funds' assets exceeded that during the run in September 2008, although the March outflows were smaller in dollar terms because these funds are much smaller now than in 2008.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the 2020 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the 2020 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance.1I regret that we are not doing this session in person, and I hope the next time Tim Adams invites me back, we will be gathering together in Washington. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Tim, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIn the first half of this year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at an almost 32 percent annual rate in the second quarter, and more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April. This recession was by far the deepest one in postwar history, but it also may go into the record books as the briefest recession in U.S. history. The flow of macrodata received since May has been surprisingly strong, and GDP growth in the third quarter is estimated by many forecasters to have rebounded at perhaps a 25 to 30 percent annual rate. This development is especially noteworthy when set in relief against the surge in new COVID-19 cases that were reported this summer in a number of U.S. states and the coincident flatlining in a number of high-frequency activity indicators that we follow to track the effect of the virus on economic activity. Although spending on many services continues to lag, the rebound in the GDP data has been broad based across indicators of goods consumption, housing, and investment. These components of aggregate demand have benefited from robust fiscal support—including the Paycheck Protection Program and expanded unemployment benefits—as well as low interest rates and efforts by the Federal Reserve to sustain the flow of credit to households and firms. In the labor market, about half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in the spring have been restored, and the unemployment rate has fallen since April by nearly 7 percentage points to 7.9 percent as of September. I remind you that in the spring, many voices questioned what good rate cuts, forward guidance, asset purchases, and lending programs could do in an economy in which people do not venture out to buy cars or build houses and in which companies do not invest to augment their capital stock. Well, the data show us that with rates low, credit available, and incomes supported by fiscal transfers, the answer is—at least so far—that they do build houses, buy cars, and order equipment and software. That said, the COVID-19 recession threw the economy into a very deep hole, and it will take some time, perhaps another year, for the level of GDP to fully recover to its previous 2019 peak. It will likely take even longer than that for the unemployment rate to return to a level consistent with our maximum-employment mandate. However, it is worth highlighting that the Committee's baseline projections summarized in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections foresee a relatively rapid return to mandate-consistent levels of employment and inflation as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).2In particular, the median Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant projects that by the end of 2023—a little more than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen to 4 percent, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels. My baseline outlook is close to these projections, but I must also acknowledge that the economic outlook is unusually uncertain, and, moreover, that the ultimate course the economy follows will depend on the course of the virus, social-distancing norms, and mitigation efforts put in place to contain it. The September FOMC Decision and the New Monetary Policy FrameworkAt our September FOMC meeting, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. We indicated that, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. We said that we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved, and also that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent,anduntil inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. We also stated that the Federal Reserve will, over coming months, continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. The September FOMC meeting was the first since the Committee approved in August our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and adopted a new policy framework.3The changes we made in our September FOMC statement bring our policy guidance in line with this new framework. In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "shortfalls[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations." This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."4While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—which remain unchanged.5 Concluding RemarksWhile economic recovery since the spring collapse has been robust, let us not forget that full economic recovery from the COVID-19 recession has a long way to go. Although the unemployment rate has declined sharply since April, it remains elevated as of September at 7.9 percent and would be about 3 percentage points higher if labor force participation remained at February 2020 levels. Moreover, despite a recent uptick, inflation is still running below our 2 percent longer-run objective. It will take some time to return to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the business cycle peak in February, and additional support from monetary—and likely fiscal—policy will be needed. Speaking for the Fed, I can assure you that we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust and rapid as possible. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2020 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 4. See Jerome H. Powell (2020),"New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review,"speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.Return to text 5. See Richard H. Clarida (2020),"The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution,"speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C. (via webcast), August 31.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the Unconventional Convention of the American Bankers Association, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the Unconventional Convention of the American Bankers Association.1I look forward to my conversation with Rob Nichols, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and some of the initiatives we have announced to support the flow of credit to households and firms during these challenging times. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIn the first half of this year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at an almost 32 percent annual rate in the second quarter, and more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April. This recession was by far the deepest one in postwar history, but it also may go into the record books as the briefest recession in U.S. history. The flow of macrodata received since May has been surprisingly strong, and GDP growth in the third quarter is estimated by many forecasters to have rebounded at roughly a 30 percent annual rate. This development is especially noteworthy when set in relief against the surge in new COVID-19 cases that were reported this summer in a number of U.S. states and the coincident flatlining in a number of high-frequency activity indicators that we follow to track the effect of the virus on economic activity. Although spending on many services continues to lag, the rebound in the GDP data has been broad based across indicators of goods consumption, housing, and investment. These components of aggregate demand have benefited from robust fiscal support—including expanded unemployment benefits and the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)—as well as low interest rates and efforts by the Federal Reserve to sustain the flow of credit to households and firms. In the labor market, about half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in the spring have been restored, and the unemployment rate has fallen since April by nearly 7 percentage points to 7.9 percent as of September. I remind you that in the spring, many voices questioned what good rate cuts, forward guidance, asset purchases, and lending programs could do in an economy in which people do not venture out to buy cars or build houses nor do companies invest to augment their capital stock. Well, the data indicate that with rates low, credit available, and incomes supported by fiscal transfers, the answer is—at least so far—that they do build houses, buy cars, and order equipment and software. That said, the COVID-19 recession threw the economy into a very deep hole, and it will take some time, perhaps another year, for the level of GDP to fully recover to its previous 2019 peak. It will likely take even longer than that for the unemployment rate to return to a level consistent with our maximum-employment mandate. However, it is worth highlighting that the Committee's baseline projections summarized in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections foresee a relatively rapid return to mandate-consistent levels of employment and inflation as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).2In particular, the median Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant projects that by the end of 2023—a little more than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen to 4 percent, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels. My baseline outlook is close to these projections, but I must also acknowledge that the economic outlook is unusually uncertain, and, moreover, that the ultimate course the economy follows will depend on the course of the virus, social-distancing norms, and mitigation efforts put in place to contain it. The September FOMC DecisionAt our September FOMC meeting, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. We indicated that, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. We said that we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved, and also that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent,anduntil inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. We also stated that the Federal Reserve will, over coming months, continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Banking InitiativesIn recent months, the Federal Reserve has announced several initiatives to support the efforts of our nation's banks to sustain the flow of credit to households and firms during these challenging times. Along with the other federal banking agencies, we have encouraged banks to work constructively with borrowers who have been affected by COVID-19—offering a customer a responsible loan modification can be a safe and sound banking practice and can help facilitate the economic recovery.3Turning to some issues of particular importance to small banks, we have provided temporary regulatory relief on the community bank leverage ratio, on regulatory reporting deadlines, and on appraisal requirements. We have also streamlined our bank examinations for small banks. These actions are providing banks with additional time and resources to adjust their operations to prioritize the financial needs of their customers and communities, and to play the vital role of lending to small businesses through the PPP. With regard to actions taken that are relevant for larger institutions, we have adapted our stress-testing framework to better identify the potential effects of the pandemic on the capital positions of our banks. In June, we released the annual stress-test results and an additional sensitivity analysis that explored vulnerabilities of banks to the downside risks to the economy arising from the pandemic.4At the same time, to ensure resilience of the largest banks, we required them to resubmit their capital plans, imposed limitations on capital distributions, and recently provided new scenarios that will be used for a second round of stress tests later this year.5 Among other actions to support financial intermediaries during the pandemic, in April, the Board issued an interim final rule that would exclude, on a temporary basis, U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from large bank holding companies' supplementary leverage ratio.6The rule has helped ease strains in the U.S. Treasury market and continues to facilitate the significant inflow of customer deposits at banks that has occurred since the onset of the event. Looking ahead, in September, the Board published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) that would modernize the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) by strengthening, clarifying, and tailoring CRA regulations to ensure that they reflect the current banking landscape and better meet the core purpose of the CRA, addressing inequities in credit access and ensuring an inclusive financial services industry.7The ANPR proposes special provisions for minority depository institutions (MDIs), women-owned financial institutions, low-income credit unions, and community development financial institutions. Because of feedback received about lack of awareness of existing MDI provisions in the CRA regulations, the Board plans to highlight all MDI special provisions and make the credit they receive more prominent and clear in revised regulation, examination guidance, and other public documentation. In addition, we also propose four specific new MDI provisions.8Finally, the CRA also proposes to create incentives for bank investments in geographic areas of need outside of traditional assessment areas. Concluding RemarksWhile recovery since the spring collapse in economic activity has been robust, let us not forget that the full economic recovery from the COVID-19 recession has a long way to go, with the unemployment rate still elevated at 7.9 percent as of September and inflation still running below our 2 percent longer-run objective. It will take some time to return to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the business cycle peak in February, and additional support from monetary—and likely fiscal—policy will be needed. Speaking for the Fed, I can assure you that we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust and rapid as possible. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2020 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. For loan modification details, see Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (2020), "Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Issues Statement on Additional Loan Accommodations Related to COVID-19," press release, August 3.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Reserve Board Releases Results of Stress Tests for 2020 and Additional Sensitivity Analyses Conducted in Light of the Coronavirus Event," press release, June 25.Return to text 5. For second-round stress-test information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Reserve Board Releases Hypothetical Scenarios for Second Round of Bank Stress Tests," press release, September 17.Return to text 6. For more details regarding the effect on the supplementary leverage ratio, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Temporary Exclusions of U.S. Treasury Securities and Deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio," interim final rule and request for comment (Docket No. 2020-07345),Federal Register,vol. 85 (April 14), pp. 20578–86.Return to text 7. For additional information on the CRA ANPR, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Reserve Board Issues Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on an Approach to Modernize Regulations That Implement the Community Reinvestment Act," press release, September 21.Return to text 8. For additional information on the new MDI provisions, see Lael Brainard (2020), "Modernizing and Strengthening CRA Regulations: A Conversation with Minority Depository Institutions," speech delivered to the National Bankers Association (via webcast), Washington, October 15.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Thank you to the Institute of International Finance, for the opportunity to speak today. It has been eight months since COVID-19 appeared in the US and the attendant containment measures began to have severe effects on the U.S. economy and financial system (the "COVID event"). While the economy is recovering faster than we originally expected, and the financial sector returned pretty quickly to stable functioning— in significant part due to strong action from governments and central banks around the world—the shock of the COVID event was by many measures the strongest in recorded history, and for a while in the spring the outcome was—as the Duke of Wellington said of Waterloo—"a damn, close-run thing." For some time, those closest to the events were too involved in fighting the fire to pull together an account of what had happened and what lessons we might learn. But at this point, it is now possible, and I believe valuable, to assess what happened in the financial system in March and April, which parts of the system came under stress, and why. The COVID event resulted in a large and uniquely exogenous shock to the economy and the financial system, and for that reason alone it can't tell us everything about what might happen in every future financial crisis. But as the first real life test of the regulatory framework erected after the global financial crisis (GFC), I believe it can tell us a lot about what is working and what aspects of our framework may need strengthening. It seems like a very long time ago, but early this year, the U.S. economy was in vibrant good health. Output growth was solid, and unemployment was at a 50-year low. Equity markets reached record highs on February 19, and in financial markets generally we saw high and in some cases stretched valuations. Business debt had been rising for a while, while household borrowing was more moderate. At the core of the financial system, large banks were in a strong position, with much higher capital ratios and liquid assets than in decades. We had seen some notable volatility in short-term funding markets, including some spikes in repo rates in 2019, but overall vulnerabilities stemming from liquidity and maturity mismatches in the financial sector still appeared low—especially so at large banks, which had substantially reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from pre-crisis levels. In late 2019, market participants were telling us that the most salient risks to the U.S. economy were from trade frictions, the challenges facing monetary policy given the proximity of interest rates to their effective lower bound, and market liquidity.1 Then the COVID event unfolded. On February 21, while we were with the Italian authorities in Riyadh for the G20 meetings, Italy announced quarantines of the northern towns being hardest hit by the new virus. This was a trigger for what became a rapid change in market sentiment, as investors began to prepare for what was beginning to seem might be a significant slowdown in economic activity. Volatility rose; selling pressure rose. As other European governments began to adopt travel bans, lockdowns, and school closures, there was a surging demand for safe assets. With fears of a widespread economic slowdown proliferating in late February and early March, Treasury prices rose and yields fell sharply, as usually happens when the economic outlook worsens. And as often happens when a shock leads to a surging demand for safe assets, some risky assets became very difficult to sell. Then on March 11, roughly two weeks after the first Italian quarantines, the WHO declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, and several new countries announced lockdowns and border closings. This was the trigger that turned what up to then had been a reasonably familiar, if concerning, flight to safety into a historically unprecedented dash for cash. Corporates preparing for a potentially extended disruption in revenues began seeking cash reserves en masse, while financial firms uncertain about the value of assets and counterparties began cutting their exposures. As a result of this scissoring, we saw serious strains in several financial markets. Some of the most severe strains emerged in short-term funding markets and among institutions engaged in liquidity transformation. I will highlight a few. First, we saw a pullback from commercial paper, or CP, markets. In an effort to contain risk in an abruptly slowing economy, investors shortened the maturities at which they were willing to lend in the CP market, in effect rushing for the exit and raising the possibility that lending might stop completely. Indeed, term CP markets did essentially shut down for some period. At the same time, some prime and tax-exempt money market funds experienced large redemptions, forcing these funds to sell assets. In addition, we saw large outflows at corporate bond funds and exchange traded funds. Corporate bond funds promise daily liquidity, but the underlying assets often take a longer time to sell. This creates conditions that can lead to runs on these funds in times of stress. Indeed, each of these three developments—the pullback from CP and the elevated redemptions at prime money funds and at corporate bond funds—can be viewed as a kind of run by investors. A run occurs when investors concerned about potential losses clamber to withdraw funds or sell their positions before other investors do. These actions can lead to sharp declines in asset prices and impair the ability of businesses to fund their operations, leading to strains across the financial system and declines in employment and spending. A fourth area of strain was in the Treasury market—one of the largest and deepest financial markets in the world. Treasury securities play a central role in short-term funding markets, such as the repo market, where they are a favored form of collateral. Significant amounts of Treasuries are held by institutions that use short-term funding, like broker-dealers and money market funds. And, the structure of the Treasury market has evolved substantially in recent years, with the growth of high-speed and algorithmic trading, and a growing share of liquidity provided by new entrants alongside established broker-dealers. The new Treasury market structure has had notable episodes of market volatility and stress, but none to compare with the COVID event.2 Treasury market conditions deteriorated rapidly in the second week of March, when a wide range of investors sought to sell Treasuries to raise cash. Foreign official and private investors, certain hedge funds, and other levered investors were among the big sellers. During this dash for cash, Treasury prices fell and yields increased, a surprising development since Treasury prices usually rise when investors try to shed risk in the face of bad news or financial stress, reflecting their status as the ultimate safe asset. While trading volumes remained robust, bid-ask spreads widened dramatically, particularly for older off-the-run Treasuries, but this soon spilled over into the more liquid on-the-run segment of the market, as well as the futures markets.3The intense and widespread selling pressures appear to have overwhelmed dealers' capacity or willingness to absorb and intermediate Treasury securities.4In the end, the Federal Reserve took a number of steps to support smooth market functioning, which I will describe in a moment. Fortunately, even with these strains in financial markets, banks were able to remain a source of strength to the financial system and the economy. Banks entered this crisis with much stronger balance sheets than the last one—with more and higher-quality capital, more liquid assets, and less reliance on fragile funding. This is a testament to reforms implemented by the Fed and other agencies in the aftermath of the GFC. Not surprisingly, however, the magnitude of the economic and financial disruptions from the COVID event posed some major challenges to banks. First, in March, many businesses—unable to satisfy their large cash demand through CP or corporate bond issuance, for the reasons I described earlier—drew down on their existing credit lines with banks in order to raise cash. As a result, commercial and industrial (C&I) loans in the banking system increased by nearly $480 billion in March—by far the largest monthly increase ever. Banks were able to fund these loans without notable problems through inflows of core deposits, other borrowing, and, to a lesser extent, by using their buffers of liquid assets. The inflow of deposits resulted from increased demand for safe haven assets, reflecting confidence in U.S. banks. While banks were a source of strain during the GFC, they were a source of strength during this crisis. After March, as the economy started to recover, many firms repaid these drawdowns and C&I lending by banks declined. If the drawdown of credit lines tested the resilience of banks to liquidity shocks, financial distress at borrowers has been testing the resilience of banks to losses. The COVID event has made it harder for many borrowers—businesses as well as households—to repay their debt. Encouraged by supervisors, banks have been working actively with their customers and have agreed to grant forbearance to millions of borrowers. At the same time, banks have recognized that the credit quality of many loans has deteriorated considerably, and they have made sizable provisions to prepare for expected loan losses. While banks have continued to lend, we have seen a notable tightening of bank lending standards. In the July Fed survey of senior loan officers, banks cited the uncertain economic outlook and industry-specific problems as the main reasons for tighter lending—the tightening was not due to capital or liquidity pressures.5Although the overall contraction in credit availability is less severe than during the GFC, tighter lending standards may make it difficult for some businesses and households to borrow during the pandemic. While the continued ability of banks to lend to creditworthy borrowers has been good news, a lot of credit in the United States is provided by nonbank financial institutions and markets. Indeed, almost two-thirds of business and household debt in the United States is held by nonbanks, though much of the origination of the debt held by nonbank investors is done or facilitated by banks. And in March, this lending by non-banks dried up. In addition to the strains in short-term funding markets, some vital long-term lending markets were virtually closed. As the extent of the economic disruptions became clear, the cost of borrowing rose sharply for businesses issuing corporate bonds, for state and local governments issuing longer-term municipal debt, and for issuers of asset-backed securities (ABS), such as originators of auto and student loans. Spreads in some cases widened to post-crisis highs. Exacerbated by the problems in short-term funding markets and at bond funds, market functioning and liquidity deteriorated, and issuance of new debt in long-term markets slowed markedly or stopped altogether. Effectively, the ability of creditworthy households, businesses, and state and local governments to borrow, even at elevated interest rates, was threatened. In light of these unusual and exigent circumstances, the Federal Reserve took a series of emergency actions to support liquidity in markets and the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. I won't review in detail the kaleidoscopic gallimaufry of actions that we took to address the dysfunctions I've just been describing: emergency lending facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to support liquidity in funding markets; similar facilities to support credit to nonfinancials; direct purchases of Treasuries; swap lines and repo facilities with foreign central banks. These are fully described elsewhere. Fundamentally, each measure was designed to address an aspect of the pressures created by the large demand for cash in the real economy and the temporarily limited willingness of financial firms to provide it. Our liquidity facilities relieved pressure on markets created by mass liquidations of assets driven by the demand for cash, as did our direct purchases of Treasuries. Our credit facilities satisfied the cash demand of borrowers more directly. Our swap lines and repo facilities with foreign central banks alleviated the shortage of dollars to satisfy dollar-denominated cash needs abroad. The result of this quite muscular intervention has been the fairly rapid return to stable market function despite the severe pressures I have been describing. Interestingly, in many cases our facilities had their effect less by actually providing liquidity or credit, than by providing a backstop. The "announcement effect" of the Fed's willingness to step in returned confidence to market participants and function to markets, without the facilities themselves seeing large amounts of use. Looking back at these events since the COVID event, what have we learned about the U.S. financial system? One lesson is that several short-term funding markets proved fragile and needed support – the commercial paper market and prime and tax-exempt money market funds, as key examples. The runs on prime money funds and commercial paper were particularly disappointing, since in many ways they resembled runs that we saw in these markets during the GFC. Money fund reforms implemented in 2016 were followed by investors shifting away from prime money funds and towards MMFs that hold securities backed by either the U. S. government or government-sponsored enterprises. Because they hold safer assets, government funds are less fragile. At the same time, some prime funds can still "break the buck" by suffering losses, or can put up "gates" that limit redemptions. Investors worried about losses at a money fund may feel some incentive to be among the first to withdraw from the fund, before it breaks the buck or puts up redemption gates in the face of large outflows. The shortening of maturities in the commercial paper market was similarly reminiscent of the GFC. It appears that these short-term funding markets remain an unstable source of funding in times of considerable financial stress. The Fed and other financial agencies have accomplished a lot in requiring or encouraging market participants to rely less on unstable short-term funding, but it is worth asking whether there may be other steps needed to secure these very important sources of liquidity. A second lesson we learned last spring is that the Treasury market is not immune to the problems of short-term and dollar funding markets. In light of the importance of the Treasury market to many other financial markets as well as to monetary and fiscal policy, this further heightens the need to think about additional steps addressing vulnerabilities in short-term funding markets. In addition, we have to ask: What can be done to improve Treasury market functioning over the longer term so that this market can withstand a large shock to demand or supply? I will simply raise that question, but not attempt to answer it here. A third, broader lesson from this event is that the regulatory framework for banks constructed after the GFC, with the refinements and recalibrations we have made over the last few years, held up well. We did not see a recurrence of the problems faced by the banking sector during the GFC, and the financial system and the economy would have been much worse off if we had seen it. Instead, banks have been a source of strength. I also believe that this conclusion is entirely consistent with the significant emergency measures undertaken by the Fed. Almost all of these measures were targeted towards financial markets, nonbank financial institutions, and the real economy. Moreover, the unprecedented and in many ways unimaginable nature of the shock posed by the COVID event made it appropriate to take these steps when we did, to backstop the functioning of markets essential to the financial system. Their creation was an unmistakable signal to market participants of the capability and willingness of the Fed to restore market functioning, and the fact that this functioning was restored so quickly, with relatively little borrowing, shows this message was received, and believed. The system worked. Looking across the areas in which strains suggest a need for further reforms, I am struck at the prominence of the continued need to focus on vulnerabilities associated with short-term funding. In some sense, this should not be surprising. Vulnerabilities associated with short-term funding have always been at the heart of financial crises and central banks' efforts to promote financial stability. Such vulnerabilities led to Walter Bagehot's 19th century dictum that central banks need to stand ready to lend freely against good collateral during periods of financial strain. Such vulnerabilities triggered the panic of 1907 and led to the establishment of the Federal Reserve. Such vulnerabilities led to runs on banks in the Great Depression and a series of reforms, including the establishment of deposit insurance. And such vulnerabilities were among those that precipitated the Global Financial Crisis. Following in that vein, at the Financial Stability Board (FSB) I have formed a high-level steering group of central bankers, market regulators, and international organizations to oversee the FSB's work on nonbank finance, and to help coordinate work across the range of global standard setting bodies that oversee the financial sector. The group is currently completing a holistic review of the COVID event to better understand the role that vulnerabilities stemming from nonbank financial institutions played in those events and to define a work program to address such vulnerabilities during 2021. One might look to the emergence of strains in short-term funding markets in March of this year as an indication that previous reform efforts fell short. Perhaps, and we will be looking at this at the FSB. But I have, as well, a more hopeful outlook, based on the extent of the test we faced and the outcome. The COVID event precipitated the most abrupt decline in U.S. and global economic activity in recorded history. It is far from shocking that funding strains emerged, and it is heartening that the banking system remained resilient and that policy efforts were able to calm financial markets relatively quickly. The lessons we draw from this year's events as we seek to strengthen our regulatory framework will leave us better positioned for the next shock and thereby support financial stability and sustained economic growth. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2019).Return to text 2. See the U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission,Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF)(July 2015).Return to text 3. Off-the-run Treasuries refer to all Treasury securities, except for the newest issue, which are called on-the-run and which typically are the most actively traded Treasury securities.Return to text 4. Limits on dealers' intermediation capacity may be driven by their internal capital, liquidity, and risk-management practices, their compliance with regulations and supervisory expectations, or concerns over their profit and loss statements.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,The July 2020 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, July 2020).Return to text