WASHINGTON—The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued a joint statement clarifying that Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) due diligence requirements for customers who may be considered "politically exposed persons" (PEPs) should be commensurate with the risks posed by the PEP relationship. The term PEP is commonly used to refer to foreign individuals who are or have been entrusted with a prominent public function, as well as their immediate family members and close associates. By virtue of this public position or relationship, these individuals may present a higher risk that their funds may be the proceeds of corruption or other illicit activity. Addressing the money-laundering threat posed by corruption of foreign officials continues to be a national security priority for the United States. The statement recognizes that PEP relationships present varying levels of money-laundering risk, which depends on facts and circumstances specific to the customer relationship. For example, PEPs with a limited transaction volume, a low dollar deposit account with the bank, known legitimate sources of funds, or access only to products or services that are subject to specific terms and payment schedules could reasonably be characterized as having lower customer risk profiles. The statement clarifies that, while banks must adopt appropriate risk-based procedures for conducting customer due diligence (CDD), the CDD rule does not create a regulatory requirement, and there is no supervisory expectation for banks to have unique, additional due diligence steps for customers who are considered PEPs. This joint statement does not alter existing BSA and anti-money laundering (AML) legal or regulatory requirements and does not require banks to cease existing risk management practices.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency The federal bank regulatory agencies today finalized three rules, which are either identical or substantially similar to interim final rules currently in effect that were issued earlier this year. They include: The final rule modifying the community bank leverage ratio adopts without change two interim final rules issued in April. The final rule temporarily lowers the community bank leverage ratio threshold and provides a gradual transition back to the prior level. Specifically, the threshold would be 8 percent for the remainder of this year, 8.5 percent for 2021, and 9 percent beginning January 1, 2022. This final rule is effective as of October 1, 2020. Similarly, the final rule on automatic restrictions of distributions adopts without change two interim final rules, one of which was Board-only, issued in March. The final rule makes more gradual, as intended, the automatic restrictions on capital distributions, such as share repurchases, dividend payments, and bonus payments. This final rule is effective as of January 1, 2021. Lastly, the CECL final rule is substantially similar to the interim final rule issued in March. The final rule gives eligible institutions the option to mitigate the estimated capital effects of CECL for two years, followed by a three-year transition period. Taken together, these measures offer institutions a transition period of up to five years. In a change from the interim rule, the final rule expands the pool of eligible institutions to include any institution adopting CECL in 2020. The CECL final rule is effective immediately upon publication in the Federal Register. Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Capital Rule and Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity Rule: Eligible Retained Income (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Capital Rule: Revised Transition of the Current Expected Credit Losses Methodology for Allowances (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Capital Rule Temporary Changes to and Transition for the Community Bank Leverage Ratio Framework (PDF)
Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Innovation Office Hours, San Francisco, California (via webcast) It is a pleasure to participate in San Francisco's Innovation Office Hours. The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco is a leader of our engagement with the tech community. And the Federal Reserve's Innovation Office Hours serve as an important forum to engage on innovation in the financial system with financial institutions, fintechs, technology companies, nonprofits, and other stakeholders. We have benefited from learning about the work you are doing to promote healthy innovation in financial services and payments. This event covered a number of important topics, including regulatory technology, blockchain, cybersecurity, and digital banking. The breadth of topics and the range of participants speak to the scale and scope of technological innovation in financial services. It is a testament to widespread investments in technology that we are able to proceed with these kinds of engagements and maintain our operations seamlessly despite the unprecedented shock associated with the COVID-19 crisis.1 The COVID-19 pandemic is taking a tremendous toll on communities across America, especially households and small businesses with the least resources to weather the storm.2The COVID-19 crisis is a dramatic reminder of the importance of a resilient and trusted payments infrastructure that is accessible to all Americans. It was notable that after a sharp reduction in spending early in the COVID-19 crisis, many households increased their spending starting on the day they received emergency relief payments under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and continuing for the following 10 days–especially households with lower incomes, greater income declines, and lower liquid savings.3The urgency with which the CARES Act emergency payments were spent underscores the importance of immediate and trusted access to funds for the many households and businesses that face cash-flow constraints. That is why the Federal Reserve remains committed to delivering on the FedNowSMService, which will enable millions of American households and small businesses to get instant access to funds rather than waiting days for checks to clear.4 More broadly, banks, fintech companies, and technology firms are all exploring the use of innovative technologies to enhance payments efficiency, expand financial inclusion, speed up settlement flows, and reduce end-user costs. Digital currencies, including central bank digital currencies (CBDCs), present opportunities but also risks associated with privacy, illicit activity, and financial stability. The introduction of Bitcoin and the subsequent emergence of stablecoins with potentially global reach, such as Facebook's Libra, have raised fundamental questions about legal and regulatory safeguards, financial stability, and the role of currency in society. This prospect has intensified calls for CBDCs to maintain the sovereign currency as the anchor of the nation's payment systems. Moreover, China has moved ahead rapidly on its version of a CBDC. With these important issues in mind, the Federal Reserve is active in conducting research and experimentation related to distributed ledger technologies and the potential use cases for digital currencies. Given the dollar's important role, it is essential that the Federal Reserve remain on the frontier of research and policy development regarding CBDCs. As part of this research, central banks are exploring the potential of innovative technologies to offer a digital equivalent of cash. Like other central banks, we are continuing to assess the opportunities and challenges of, as well as the use cases for, a CBDC, as a complement to cash and other payments options. There continues to be strong demand for U.S. currency, and we remain committed to ensuring the public has access to a range of payments options. We have been conducting in-house experiments for the last few years, through means that include the Board's Technology Lab, which has been building and testing a range of distributed ledger platforms to understand their potential opportunity and risk. This multidisciplinary team, with application developers from the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, and New York, supports a policy team at the Board that is studying the implications of digital currencies on the payments ecosystem, monetary policy, financial stability, banking and finance, and consumer protection. To enhance the Federal Reserve's understanding of digital currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is collaborating with researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in a multiyear effort to build and test a hypothetical digital currency oriented to central bank uses. The research project will explore the use of existing and new technologies as needed. Lessons from this collaboration will be published, and any codebase that is developed through this effort will be offered as open-source software for anyone to use for experimentation. The objectives of our research and experimentation across the Federal Reserve System are to assess the safety and efficiency of digital currency systems, to inform our understanding of private-sector arrangements, and to give us hands-on experience to understand the opportunities and limitations of possible technologies for digital forms of central bank money. These efforts are intended to ensure that we fully understand the potential as well as the associated risks and possible unintended consequences that new technologies present in the payments arena. Separately, a significant policy process would be required to consider the issuance of a CBDC, along with extensive deliberations and engagement with other parts of the federal government and a broad set of other stakeholders. There are also important legal considerations. It is important to understand how the existing provisions of the Federal Reserve Act with regard to currency issuance apply to a CBDC and whether a CBDC would have legal tender status, depending on the design. The Federal Reserve has not made a decision whether to undertake such a significant policy process, as we are taking the time and effort to understand the significant implications of digital currencies and CBDCs around the globe. In addition to these experiments, the Federal Reserve continues to collaborate with and learn from other central banks. We are participating in the CBDC coalition of central banks. While each country will make decisions on whether to issue and how to design a CBDC based on its own domestic legal framework and financial and economic context, we benefit from collaboration on CBDC research. Sharing lessons learned, jointly conducting experiments, and bringing diverse expertise to bear helps us make progress in developing potential approaches to address challenging hurdles, such as threats to cybersecurity, counterfeiting and fraud, and anti-money laundering, to name a few, as well as on shared goals, such as increasing the ease and efficiency of cross-border transactions. Since financial and payments systems share extensive cross-border linkages, a poorly designed CBDC issued in one jurisdiction could create financial stability issues in another jurisdiction. A cyberattack on a CBDC arrangement in one jurisdiction could create domestic financial stress, which could, in turn, affect linked economies or have broader effects if confidence in certain technologies or payment mechanisms is eroded. More broadly, the Federal Reserve looks forward to increased international engagement on matters related to innovation and technological change that impact central banks and those we serve. Our new initiative with the Bank of International Settlement's Innovation Hub, through an innovation center at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, will provide a useful venue for increased cooperation and exchange.5 Let me conclude by noting that innovation is central to our work. We remain committed to understanding how technological advances can help the Federal Reserve carry out our core missions, as well as how they are changing the ways that banks, payments, and financial markets operate. For example, we are leveraging machine learning, natural language processing, and other artificial intelligence tools to help us analyze data, and we are monitoring how financial institutions use these tools in their decisionmaking. We are expanding our use of cloud computing to enhance our operations, and we continue to enhance our cybersecurity tools to strengthen our cyber posture. These and other technologies are fundamentally changing every aspect of our work, and the Federal Reserve remains optimistic about the power of healthy innovation to improve the resilience, efficiency, and inclusiveness of our financial system when the appropriate safeguards are in place. 1. I am grateful to David Mills and Paul Wong as well as Melissa Leistra, Sonja Danburg, and Kathy Wilson of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For information on the impact of COVID-19 on communities around the country, see Federal Reserve System,FedListens: Perspectives from the Public(PDF)(Federal Reserve System, June 2020); and Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, "Double Jeopardy: COVID-19's Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (PDF)," Brief (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020).Return to text 3. Baker, Farrokhnia, Meyer, Pagel, and Yannelis (2020) examine a panel of households using a financial planning app and find that these households responded quickly to CARES Act stimulus payments; see Scott R. Baker, R.A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis, "Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments," NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020).Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard, "The Future of Retail Payments in the United States (PDF)" (remarks at the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), August 6, 2020).Return to text 5. Bank for International Settlements, "BIS Innovation Hub to Expand to New Locations in Europe and North America," news release, June 30, 2020.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Outstanding Women of Kansas Awards Ceremony, Topeka, Kansas Thank you to the 19th Amendment Centennial Celebration Committee for the honor of being included among these distinguished awardees, whose achievements have done so much for our state and our nation. We are here today because of the tireless efforts of brave women—including Kansas women—demanding that men and women have an equal right to vote and shape their destiny. The suffragettes didn't only achieve something for women. Through their efforts, our country became a stronger democracy by extending the full opportunity for women to be counted and to take part in the political process. The passage of the 19th Amendment in 1920 enabled women to directly participate in selecting our country's leaders. It paved the way for women to take part on equal terms, including by serving as leaders themselves. None of us singled out today would be here without the extraordinary efforts of those who secured the vote for women. In my case, it was serving as Kansas's first female State Bank Commissioner, and the first person to serve on the Federal Reserve Board in the role designated by Congress for someone with community banking experience. The sacrifice and persistence of those women more than a century ago set an example for future generations of women and allows our daughters to dream that anything is possible with hard work, commitment, and determination. That legacy has deep roots in Kansas. As many here know, in 1861, Kansasgranted women a limited right to vote in school district elections; and, by 1867, Kansas became the first U.S. state to hold a statewide referendum on women's suffrage. Even though this first referendum was defeated, it reflected and contributed to a new way of thinking about what it meant to be a woman and citizen. In 1887, Kansas elected the first female mayor in America. And in1912, Kansas became the eighth state to approve women's voting rights in all elections. I could not be more proud of my Kansas heritage. The participation of women in the political and policymaking process brings a broader perspective. Throughout my career, and as an attorney and a public servant, I have found that the inclusion of individuals with a broad range of experiences deepens our understanding of the issues and results in better discussions and more thoughtful decisionmaking. In my current role, I bring the perspective of someone from a small, rural, agricultural community, who has worked as a community banker and as a state regulator. Those aren't typical experiences for a Fed policymaker. This diversity is a strength, as Congress recognized by creating a role on the Federal Reserve Board designated for someone with community banking experience. I am the first to serve in this capacity, and I strongly believe that our economic and financial system is strengthened when we consider the implications of our regulatory decisions for bankers on Main Street as well as on Wall Street. I approach our monetary policy deliberations in a similar way. Our actions in response to the recent pandemic have clearly benefited from this perspective, as we understand how the varying state and local approaches have affected economic conditions across the nation. In closing, it is appropriate that during this election season we honor the women who secured that right, first in Kansas, and then through their campaign to ratify the 19th amendment. The greatest tribute to those women, and the best way to honor their legacy, is to vote. Another way is through public service, and I would strongly encourage all—but in particular women—to consider serving in government at the local, state, or federal level. It is the most challenging, but by far the most rewarding work that I have done, and I hope you will consider serving as well. Thank you again for this honor.
WASHINGTON—The federal banking agencies today issued a joint statement updating their existing enforcement guidance to enhance transparency regarding how they evaluate enforcement actions that are required by statute when financial institutions fail to meet Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money laundering (BSA/AML) obligations. The statement clarifies that isolated or technical violations or deficiencies are generally not considered the kinds of problems that would result in an enforcement action. The statement also addresses how the agencies evaluate violations of individual components (known as pillars) of the BSA/AML compliance program. It also describes how the agencies incorporate the customer due diligence regulations and recordkeeping requirements issued by the U.S. Department of the Treasury as part of the internal controls pillar of the financial institution's BSA/AML compliance program. The statement, issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, updates and supersedes the Interagency Statement on Enforcement of BSA/AML Requirements issued on July 19, 2007, to promote a consistent approach to the application of Section 8(s) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act and Section 206(q) of the Federal Credit Union Act. The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network simultaneously issued a "Statement on Enforcement of the Bank Secrecy Act" that sets forth its approach to enforcement in circumstances of non-compliance with the BSA.
Following an extensive review that included numerous public events across the country, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on Thursday announced the unanimous approval of updates to itsStatement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which articulates its approach to monetary policy and serves as the foundation for its policy actions. The updates reflect changes in the economy over the past decade and how policymakers are taking these changes into account in conducting monetary policy. The updated statement is also intended to enhance the transparency, accountability and effectiveness of monetary policy. "The economy is always evolving, and the FOMC's strategy for achieving its goals must adapt to meet the new challenges that arise," said Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell. "Our revised statement reflects our appreciation for the benefits of a strong labor market, particularly for many in low- and moderate-income communities, and that a robust job market can be sustained without causing an unwelcome increase in inflation." Among the more significant changes to the framework document are: The Committee first adopted a framework statement in 2012. Thisfirst public reviewof the FOMC framework was announced by Chair Powell in November 2018, and involved three distinct components. First, the Federal Reserve hosted a series of 15 Fed Listens events across the country to engage with employee groups and union members, small business owners, residents of low- and moderate-income communities, retirees, and others to hear a wide range of perspectives about how monetary policy decisions affect their communities. A report summarizing all of those events is available here:https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/fedlistens-report-20200612.pdf. Second, the Federal Reserve in June 2019 convened a research conference at which prominent academic experts addressed economic topics central to the review. That conference program, links to the conference papers and presentations, and links to session videos are available here:https://www.federalreserve.gov/conferences/conference-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-communications-20190605.htm. Finally, the Committee explored the range of issues that were brought to light during the course of the review in five consecutive meetings beginning in July 2019. Analytical staff work put together by teams across the Federal Reserve System provided essential background for the Committee's discussions. Minutes of those meetings are available here:https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htmand a collection of those papers is available here:https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-system-analytical-work.htm. The FOMC reported it would continue its practice of considering the Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy each January and that it intends to undertake a public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices roughly every 5 years. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced details of the FedNow℠ Service, a new 24x7x365 interbank settlement service with clearing functionality to support instant payments in the United States. The features and functionality described in the accompanyingFederal Registernotice represent a key milestone in the FedNow Service's development and are based on input received from the public in response to the Board's 2019 request for comment. The Federal Reserve will take a phased approach to service implementation. The first release of the FedNow Service will provide core clearing and settlement features that will support market needs and help banks manage the transition to a 24x7x365 service. Based on ongoing stakeholder engagement, additional features and service enhancements will be introduced over time. The target launch date for the service remains 2023 or 2024, with a more specific time frame to be announced after additional work is completed. The Federal Reserve has a long-standing role in providing payment and settlement services to promote an accessible, safe, and efficient U.S. payment system. The FedNow Service, alongside similar services provided by the private sector, will modernize the U.S. payment system and bring the benefits of instant payments broadly to communities across the country. "The rapid expenditure of COVID emergency relief payments highlighted the critical importance of having a resilient instant payments infrastructure with nationwide reach, especially for households and small businesses with cash flow constraints," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "Since we initiated FedNow one year ago, we have been hitting our project milestones, and today I am pleased to announce the Federal Reserve Board has approved the core features and functionality based on extensive input from stakeholders." The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Service Details on Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Instant Payments
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Apex Bancorp, Inc., Camden, Tennessee, to acquire control of Community Capital Bancshares, Inc. ("Community Capital"), and thereby indirectly acquire control of Community Capital's state nonmember bank subsidiary, AB&T, both of Albany, Georgia. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by First Illinois Bancorp, Inc., East St. Louis, Illinois, to acquire Rockwood Bancshares, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary state nonmember bank, Rockwood Bank, both of Eureka, Missouri. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Following its stress tests earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced individual large bank capital requirements, which will be effective on October 1. Under its framework for large banks—those with more than $100 billion in total assets—capital requirements are in part determined by stress test results, which provide a risk-sensitive and forward-looking assessment of capital needs. The below table shows the total common equity tier 1, or CET1, capital requirements for each large bank, which is comprised of several components, including: Capital buffers, such as the SCB and GSIB surcharge, are different than minimum capital requirements for each firm. The Federal Reserve supports banking organizations that choose to use their capital buffers to lend to households and businesses and undertake other supportive actions in a safe and sound manner. When using their buffers, banking organizations may make capital distributions up to prescribed limits, which include automatic limitations in the capital framework, as well as any additional limitations determined by the Board. Also on Monday, the Board affirmed the stress test results for five firms that requested reconsideration. Those firms are BMO Financial Corporation, Capital One Financial Corporation, Citizens Financial Group, Inc., The Goldman Sachs Group Inc., and Regions Financial Corporation. The reconsideration process involved an independent group—separate from the stress testing group—that analyzed and evaluated the results. The results were checked for errors and to ensure that the stress test models, which project the loan losses for banks, worked as intended and were consistent with the Board's stress test framework. As the Board has done with input gained from a variety of stakeholders and events, including its annual stress test model symposium, the Board will assess the information learned from the reconsideration process and use it to continue improving its stress testing methodology. *The GSIB surcharge is updated annually in the first quarter. **On September 4, this value was corrected due to an error identified by the Board. Seeherefor more information. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced revised pricing for its Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF). The revised pricing reduces the interest rate spread on tax-exempt notes for each credit rating category by 50 basis points and reduces the amount by which the interest rate for taxable notes is adjusted relative to tax-exempt notes. Today's changes will ensure the MLF continues to provide an effective backstop to assist U.S. states and local governments as they weather the pandemic. The MLF was established under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary. It offers up to $500 billion in lending to states and municipalities to help manage cash flow stresses caused by the coronavirus pandemic. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Municipal Liquidity Facility
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a cease and desist order against Capital One Financial Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The enforcement action is the result of a significant data breach from March 2019 at the firm's national bank subsidiaries affecting the personal information of Capital One credit card customers and applicants for credit card products. The Board supervises the bank holding company and is requiring it to enhance its risk-management program and related governance and controls, specifically around cybersecurity and information security. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with a separate action against the national bank, which is overseen by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent cease-and-desist order against Gregory White, former employee of Heartland Bank, Little Rock, Arkansas, for disclosing confidential supervisory information without authorization. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Thursday highlighted the research and experimentation undertaken to enhance its understanding of the opportunities and risks associated with central bank digital currencies. The initiatives complement a broad set of payments-related innovation projects currently underway within the Federal Reserve System. "Given the dollar's important role, it is essential that the Federal Reserve remain on the frontier of research and policy development regarding central bank digital currencies," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. "Like other central banks, we are continuing to assess the opportunities and challenges of, as well as the use cases for, a digital currency, as a complement to cash and other payments options." Technological innovations inspire new ways to think about money. Consistent with its role in promoting a safe, accessible, and efficient U.S. payment system, the Federal Reserve is engaged in ongoing research and experimentation with the latest payment technologies. The Federal Reserve Board's Technology Lab (TechLab) is expanding experimentation with technologies relevant to digital currencies and other payment innovations. The TechLab conducts hands-on research to further the Federal Reserve's understanding of payment technologies and support development of policy views. The TechLab is a multidisciplinary team composed of Board and Federal Reserve Bank staff with expertise in payments, economics, law, information technology, and computer science. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is collaborating with researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on a multiyear effort to build a hypothetical digital currency oriented for central bank use. This research project is intended to support the Board's broader efforts in assessing the safety and efficiency of central bank digital currency systems. The project focuses solely on developing an understanding of the capacities and limitations of the relevant technologies, rather than serving as a prototype for a Federal Reserve issued digital currency or addressing the wide-ranging policy issues associated with its potential issuance. The Federal Reserve also continues its collaboration with other central banks and international organizations as it advances its understanding of central bank digital currencies. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Innovation
The Federal Reserve Board in December will co-host a research conference on bank supervision. The conference will bring together academics, supervisors, bankers, and other stakeholders to discuss the theory and practice of bank supervision. The Board, Harvard Law School, and the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania will jointly host the virtual conference, scheduled for Friday, December 11. It will feature several panels that will discuss, among other topics, the importance of bank supervision at different points in the business cycle and transparency in the supervisory process. The conference will also include a keynote speech from Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles. Additional details, including an agenda and panelists, will be announced shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from June 22 through July 29, 2020. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 28-29, 2020. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Minutes of Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 28-29, 2020:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (via webcast) Thank you, Esther, for that introduction, and good morning. The Kansas City Fed's Economic Policy Symposiums have consistently served as a vital platform for discussing the most challenging economic issues of the day. Judging by the agenda and the papers, this year will be no exception. For the past year and a half, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have been conducting the first-ever public review of our monetary policy framework.1Earlier today we released a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, a document that lays out our goals, articulates our framework for monetary policy, and serves as the foundation for our policy actions.2Today I will discuss our review, the changes in the economy that motivated us to undertake it, and our revised statement, which encapsulates the main conclusions of the review. Evolution of the Fed's Monetary Policy FrameworkWe began this public review in early 2019 to assess the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications that would best foster achievement of our congressionally assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability over the years ahead in service to the American people. Because the economy is always evolving, the FOMC's strategy for achieving its goals—our policy framework—must adapt to meet the new challenges that arise. Forty years ago, the biggest problem our economy faced was high and rising inflation.3The Great Inflation demanded a clear focus on restoring the credibility of the FOMC's commitment to price stability. Chair Paul Volcker brought that focus to bear, and the "Volcker disinflation," with the continuing stewardship of Alan Greenspan, led to the stabilization of inflation and inflation expectations in the 1990s at around 2 percent. The monetary policies of the Volcker era laid the foundation for the long period of economic stability known as the Great Moderation. This new era brought new challenges to the conduct of monetary policy. Before the Great Moderation, expansions typically ended in overheating and rising inflation. Since then, prior to the current pandemic-induced downturn, a series of historically long expansions had been more likely to end with episodes of financial instability, prompting essential efforts to substantially increase the strength and resilience of the financial system.4 By the early 2000s, many central banks around the world had adopted a monetary policy framework known as inflation targeting.5Although the precise features of inflation targeting differed from country to country, the core framework always articulated an inflation goal as a primary objective of monetary policy. Inflation targeting was also associated with increased communication and transparency designed to clarify the central bank's policy intentions. This emphasis on transparency reflected what was then a new appreciation that policy is most effective when it is clearly understood by the public. Inflation-targeting central banks generally do not focus solely on inflation: Those with "flexible" inflation targets take into account economic stabilization in addition to their inflation objective. Under Ben Bernanke's leadership, the Federal Reserve adopted many of the features associated with flexible inflation targeting.6We made great advances in transparency and communications, with the initiation of quarterly press conferences and the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which comprises the individual economic forecasts of FOMC participants. During that time, then–Board Vice Chair Janet Yellen led an effort on behalf of the FOMC to codify the Committee's approach to monetary policy. In January 2012, the Committee issued its first Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which we often refer to as the consensus statement. A central part of this statement was the articulation of a longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent.7Because the structure of the labor market is strongly influenced by nonmonetary factors that can change over time, the Committee did not set a numerical objective for maximum employment. However, the statement affirmed the Committee's commitment to fulfilling both of its congressionally mandated goals. The 2012 statement was a significant milestone, reflecting lessons learned from fighting high inflation as well as from experience around the world with flexible inflation targeting. The statement largely articulated the policy framework the Committee had been following for some time.8 Motivation for the ReviewThe completion of the original consensus statement in January 2012 occurred early on in the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis, when notions of what the "new normal" might bring were quite uncertain. Since then, our understanding of the economy has evolved in ways that are central to monetary policy. Of course, the conduct of monetary policy has also evolved. A key purpose of our review has been to take stock of the lessons learned over this period and identify any further changes in our monetary policy framework that could enhance our ability to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives in the years ahead.9 Our evolving understanding of four key economic developments motivated our review. First, assessments of the potential, or longer-run, growth rate of the economy have declined. For example, since January 2012, the median estimate of potential growth from FOMC participants has fallen from 2.5 percent to 1.8 percent (seefigure 1). Some slowing in growth relative to earlier decades was to be expected, reflecting slowing population growth and the aging of the population. More troubling has been the decline in productivity growth, which is the primary driver of improving living standards over time.10 Second, the general level of interest rates has fallen both here in the United States and around the world. Estimates of the neutral federal funds rate, which is the rate consistent with the economy operating at full strength and with stable inflation, have fallen substantially, in large part reflecting a fall in the equilibrium real interest rate, or "r-star." This rate is not affected by monetary policy but instead is driven by fundamental factors in the economy, including demographics and productivity growth—the same factors that drive potential economic growth.11The median estimate from FOMC participants of the neutral federal funds rate has fallen by nearly half since early 2012, from 4.25 percent to 2.5 percent (seefigure 2). This decline in assessments of the neutral federal funds rate has profound implications for monetary policy. With interest rates generally running closer to their effective lower bound even in good times, the Fed has less scope to support the economy during an economic downturn by simply cutting the federal funds rate.12The result can be worse economic outcomes in terms of both employment and price stability, with the costs of such outcomes likely falling hardest on those least able to bear them. Third, and on a happier note, the record-long expansion that ended earlier this year led to the best labor market we had seen in some time. The unemployment rate hovered near 50-year lows for roughly 2 years, well below most estimates of its sustainable level. And the unemployment rate captures only part of the story. Having declined significantly in the five years following the crisis, the labor force participation rate flattened out and began rising even though the aging of the population suggested that it should keep falling.13For individuals in their prime working years, the participation rate fully retraced its post-crisis decline, defying earlier assessments that the Global Financial Crisis might cause permanent structural damage to the labor market. Moreover, as the long expansion continued, the gains began to be shared more widely across society. The Black and Hispanic unemployment rates reached record lows, and the differentials between these rates and the white unemployment rate narrowed to their lowest levels on record.14As we heard repeatedly in ourFed Listensevents, the robust job market was delivering life-changing gains for many individuals, families, and communities, particularly at the lower end of the income spectrum.15In addition, many who had been left behind for too long were finding jobs, benefiting their families and communities, and increasing the productive capacity of our economy. Before the pandemic, there was every reason to expect that these gains would continue. It is hard to overstate the benefits of sustaining a strong labor market, a key national goal that will require a range of policies in addition to supportive monetary policy. Fourth, the historically strong labor market did not trigger a significant rise in inflation. Over the years, forecasts from FOMC participants and private-sector analysts routinely showed a return to 2 percent inflation, but these forecasts were never realized on a sustained basis (seefigure 3). Inflation forecasts are typically predicated on estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, or "u-star," and of how much upward pressure on inflation arises when the unemployment rate falls relative to u-star.16As the unemployment rate moved lower and inflation remained muted, estimates of u-star were revised down. For example, the median estimate from FOMC participants declined from 5.5 percent in 2012 to 4.1 percent at present (seefigure 4). The muted responsiveness of inflation to labor market tightness, which we refer to as the flattening of the Phillips curve, also contributed to low inflation outcomes.17In addition, longer-term inflation expectations, which we have long seen as an important driver of actual inflation, and global disinflationary pressures may have been holding down inflation more than was generally anticipated. Other advanced economies have also struggled to achieve their inflation goals in recent decades. The persistent undershoot of inflation from our 2 percent longer-run objective is a cause for concern. Many find it counterintuitive that the Fed would want to push up inflation. After all, low and stable inflation is essential for a well-functioning economy. And we are certainly mindful that higher prices for essential items, such as food, gasoline, and shelter, add to the burdens faced by many families, especially those struggling with lost jobs and incomes. However, inflation that is persistently too low can pose serious risks to the economy. Inflation that runs below its desired level can lead to an unwelcome fall in longer-term inflation expectations, which, in turn, can pull actual inflation even lower, resulting in an adverse cycle of ever-lower inflation and inflation expectations. This dynamic is a problem because expected inflation feeds directly into the general level of interest rates. Well-anchored inflation expectations are critical for giving the Fed the latitude to support employment when necessary without destabilizing inflation.18But if inflation expectations fall below our 2 percent objective, interest rates would decline in tandem. In turn, we would have less scope to cut interest rates to boost employment during an economic downturn, further diminishing our capacity to stabilize the economy through cutting interest rates. We have seen this adverse dynamic play out in other major economies around the world and have learned that once it sets in, it can be very difficult to overcome. We want to do what we can to prevent such a dynamic from happening here. Elements of the ReviewWe began our review with these changes in the economy in mind. The review had three pillars: a series ofFed Listensevents held around the country, a flagship research conference, and a series of Committee discussions supported by rigorous staff analysis. As is appropriate in our democratic society, we have sought extensive engagement with the public throughout the review. TheFed Listensevents built on a long-standing practice around the Federal Reserve System of engaging with community groups. The 15 events involved a wide range of participants—workforce development groups, union members, small business owners, residents of low- and moderate-income communities, retirees, and others—to hear about how our policies affect peoples' daily lives and livelihoods.19The stories we heard atFed Listensevents became a potent vehicle for us to connect with the people and communities that our policies are intended to benefit. One of the clear messages we heard was that the strong labor market that prevailed before the pandemic was generating employment opportunities for many Americans who in the past had not found jobs readily available. A clear takeaway from these events was the importance of achieving and sustaining a strong job market, particularly for people from low- and moderate-income communities. The research conference brought together some of the world's leading academic experts to address topics central to our review, and the presentations and robust discussion we engaged in were an important input to our review process.20 Finally, the Committee explored the range of issues that were brought to light during the course of the review in five consecutive meetings beginning in July 2019. Analytical staff work put together by teams across the Federal Reserve System provided essential background for each of the Committee's discussions.21 Our plans to conclude the review earlier this year were, like so many things, delayed by the arrival of the pandemic. When we resumed our discussions last month, we turned our attention to distilling the most important lessons of the review in a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. New Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy StrategyThe federated structure of the Federal Reserve, reflected in the FOMC, ensures that we always have a diverse range of perspectives on monetary policy, and that is certainly the case today. Nonetheless, I am pleased to say that the revised consensus statement was adopted today with the unanimous support of Committee participants. Our new consensus statement, like its predecessor, explains how we interpret the mandate Congress has given us and describes the broad framework that we believe will best promote our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Before addressing the key changes in our statement, let me highlight some areas of continuity. We continue to believe that specifying a numerical goal for employment is unwise, because the maximum level of employment is not directly measurable and changes over time for reasons unrelated to monetary policy. The significant shifts in estimates of the natural rate of unemployment over the past decade reinforce this point. In addition, we have not changed our view that a longer-run inflation rate of 2 percent is most consistent with our mandate to promote both maximum employment and price stability. Finally, we continue to believe that monetary policy must be forward looking, taking into account the expectations of households and businesses and the lags in monetary policy's effect on the economy. Thus, our policy actions continue to depend on the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, including potential risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of our goals. The key innovations in our new consensus statement reflect the changes in the economy I described. Our new statement explicitly acknowledges the challenges posed by the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound. By reducing our scope to support the economy by cutting interest rates, the lower bound increases downward risks to employment and inflation.22To counter these risks, we are prepared to use our full range of tools to support the economy. With regard to the employment side of our mandate, our revised statement emphasizes that maximum employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal. This change reflects our appreciation for the benefits of a strong labor market, particularly for many in low- and moderate-income communities.23In addition, our revised statement says that our policy decision will be informed by our "assessments of theshortfallsof employment from its maximum level" rather than by "deviationsfrom its maximum level" as in our previous statement.24This change may appear subtle, but it reflects our view that a robust job market can be sustained without causing an outbreak of inflation. In earlier decades when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise noticeably in response to a strengthening labor market. It was sometimes appropriate for the Fed to tighten monetary policy as employment rose toward its estimated maximum level in order to stave off an unwelcome rise in inflation. The change to "shortfalls" clarifies that, going forward, employment can run at or above real-time estimates of its maximum level without causing concern, unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of our goals.25Of course, when employment is below its maximum level, as is clearly the case now, we will actively seek to minimize that shortfall by using our tools to support economic growth and job creation. We have also made important changes with regard to the price-stability side of our mandate. Our longer-run goal continues to be an inflation rate of 2 percent. Our statement emphasizes that our actions to achieve both sides of our dual mandate will be most effective if longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. However, if inflation runs below 2 percent following economic downturns but never moves above 2 percent even when the economy is strong, then, over time, inflation will average less than 2 percent. Households and businesses will come to expect this result, meaning that inflation expectations would tend to move below our inflation goal and pull realized inflation down. To prevent this outcome and the adverse dynamics that could ensue, our new statement indicates that we will seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Therefore, following periods when inflation has been running below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. In seeking to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, we are not tying ourselves to a particular mathematical formula that defines the average. Thus, our approach could be viewed as a flexible form of average inflation targeting.26Our decisions about appropriate monetary policy will continue to reflect a broad array of considerations and will not be dictated by any formula. Of course, if excessive inflationary pressures were to build or inflation expectations were to ratchet above levels consistent with our goal, we would not hesitate to act. The revisions to our statement add up to a robust updating of our monetary policy framework. To an extent, these revisions reflect the way we have been conducting policy in recent years. At the same time, however, there are some important new features. Overall, our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy conveys our continued strong commitment to achieving our goals, given the difficult challenges presented by the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound. In conducting monetary policy, we will remain highly focused on fostering as strong a labor market as possible for the benefit of all Americans. And we will steadfastly seek to achieve a 2 percent inflation rate over time. Looking AheadOur review has provided a platform for productive discussion and engagement with the public we serve. TheFed Listensevents helped us connect with our core constituency, the American people, and hear directly how their everyday lives are affected by our policies. We believe that conducting a review at regular intervals is a good institutional practice, providing valuable feedback and enhancing transparency and accountability. And with the ever-changing economy, future reviews will allow us to take a step back, reflect on what we have learned, and adapt our practices as we strive to achieve our dual-mandate goals. As our statement indicates, we plan to undertake a thorough public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices roughly every five years. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 197–275. Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 333–75, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Aaronson_web.pdf. Altig, David, Jeff Fuhrer, Marc P. Giannoni, and Thomas Laubach (2020). "The Federal Reserve's Review of its Monetary Policy Framework: A Roadmap," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 27. Arias, Jonas, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, Thorsten Drautzburg, and Andrea Raffo (2020). "Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 11 (Spring), pp. 97–116. Blanchard, Olivier J., Eugenio M. Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications," IMF Working Paper 15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012). "Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 24–25, 2012 (PDF)," transcript. Washington: Board of Governors. ——— (2018). "Federal Reserve to Review Strategies, Tools, and Communication Practices It Uses to Pursue Its Mandate of Maximum Employment and Price Stability," press release, November 15. ——— (2020a),Monetary Policy Report (PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, February. ——— (2020b).Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public (PDF),report. Washington: Board of Governors, June. Caldara, Dario, Etienne Gagnon, Enrique Martínez-García, and Christopher J. Neely (2020). "Monetary Policy and Economic Performance since the Financial Crisis," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-065. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Clarida, Richard H. (2019). "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 22. Crump, Richard, Christopher Nekarda, and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau (2020). "Unemployment Rate Benchmarks," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-072. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Daly, Mary C. (2020). "We Can't Afford Not To," speech delivered at the National Press Club Virtual Event, Washington, June 15. Duarte, Fernando, Benjamin K. Johannsen, Leonardo Melosi, and Taisuke Nakata (2020). "Strengthening the FOMC's Framework in View of the Effective Lower Bound and Some Considerations Related to Time-Inconsistent Strategies," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-067. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Feiveson, Laura, Nils Goernemann, Julie Hotchkiss, Karel Mertens, and Jae Sim (2020). "Distributional Considerations for Monetary Policy Strategy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,vol. 29.Chicago: University of Chicago Press,pp. 1–51. ——— (2018). "Is Slow Productivity and Output Growth in Advanced Economies the New Normal?"International Productivity Monitor,vol. 35 (Fall), pp. 138–48. Fuhrer, Jeff, Giovanni P. Olivei, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell (2018). "Should the Federal Reserve Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 443–97. Goodfriend, Marvin (2007). "How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 21 (Fall), pp. 47–68. Gordon, Robert J. (2017).The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hebden, James, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020). "How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75. Lopez-Salido, David, Gerardo Sanz-Maldonado, Carly Schippits, and Min Wei (2020). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: The Role of Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 19. Lunsford, Kurt G., and Kenneth D. West (2019). "Some Evidence on Secular Drivers of U.S. Safe Real Rates,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 11 (October), pp. 113–39. Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "Opening Remarks: Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy (PDF)." In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed.,Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25. Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City, pp. 1– 18. ——— (2019). "Opening Remarks: Challenges for Monetary Policy (PDF)." In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed.,Challenges for Monetary Policy:A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22–24. Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City, pp. 1–16. Svensson, Lars E. O. (1999). "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 607–54. ——— (2020). "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 16 (February), pp. 133–93. Volcker, Paul A. (2008).Interview (PDF)by Donald L. Kohn, Lynn S. Fox, and David H. Small (second day of interview),Federal Reserve Board Oral History Project,Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Washington: Board of Governors, January 28. Volcker, Paul A., and Toyoo Gyohten (1992).Changing Fortunes: The World's Money and the Threat to American Leadership.New York: Crown. 1. See Board of Governors (2018) and Clarida (2019).Return to text 2. The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200827a.htm.Return to text 3. Consumer price inflation, which was running below 2 percent in the early 1960s, had risen into the double digits by the late 1970s and was slightly above 12 percent when the Committee gathered for an unscheduled meeting in the Eccles Building in Washington, D.C., on a Saturday in October 1979—before the days when transparency was the hallmark of institutional accountability—and decided to change the conduct of monetary policy. See Volcker and Gyohten (1992); also see Volcker (2008), pp. 73–74.Return to text 4. See Powell (2019).Return to text 5. For a readable explanation of inflation targeting, see Bernanke and Mishkin (1997); also see Bernanke and others (1999).Return to text 6. For the formalization and development of the concept of flexible inflation targeting, see Svensson (1999) and, more recently, Svensson (2020).Return to text 7. As measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures.Return to text 8. See Board of Governors (2012), p. 43.Return to text 9. On the benefits of holding a review, see Fuhrer and others (2018).Return to text 10. Between 1995 and 2003, business-sector output per hour increased at an annual rate of 3.4 percent, and it has risen only 1.4 percent since then. Fernald (2015) suggests 2003 as a break point for the beginning of the productivity slowdown. See also Fernald (2018), Gordon (2017), and Powell (2018).Return to text 11. Estimates of r-star have fallen between 2 and 3 percentage points over the past two decades. For evidence on the secular decline in interest rates in the United States and abroad see, for instance, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017) and Lunsford and West (2019). See also the recent evidence in Lopez-Salido and others (2020).Return to text 12. Both the experience following the Global Financial Crisis and the current situation drive this point home. After the Global Financial Crisis, the Fed held the federal funds rate at the lower bound for seven years. Thereafter, as the economy strengthened, the federal funds rate reached a peak just above 2 percent. By comparison, the federal funds rate averaged a little more than 5 percent in the 1990s. And, at the onset of the COVID pandemic, we quickly cut rates to the effective lower bound. But since the federal funds rate was only about 1-1/2 percent before the pandemic—because that is what the economy required at that time—our scope to reduce the federal funds rate was far less than in earlier recessions.Return to text 13. The labor force participation rate for prime-age individuals (those between 25 and 54 years old), which is much less sensitive to the effects of population aging, has been rising over the past few years and continued to increase in 2019. For a longer-run perspective, see the analysis presented in Aaronson and others (2014).Return to text 14. The decline in the unemployment rate for African Americans has been particularly sizable, and its average rate in the second half of October 2019 was the lowest recorded since the data began to be reported in 1972; see Board of Governors (2020a). See also Daly (2020) and Aaronson and others (2019).Return to text 15. Information on theFed Listensevents is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text 16. A discussion of various concepts of unemployment rate benchmarks that are frequently used by policymakers for assessing the current state of the economy is presented in Crump and others (2020).Return to text 17. See, for instance, Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015).Return to text 18. The success of monetary policy in taming high and variable inflation in the 1980s and 1990s was instrumental in anchoring inflation expectations at low levels. See, for instance, Goodfriend (2007).Return to text 19. See the reportFed Listens: Perspectives from the Public (Board of Governors, 2020b), which summarizes the 14Fed Listensevents hosted by the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks during 2019, as well as an additional event in May 2020 to follow up with participants about the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on their communities. Information on the individualFed Listensevents is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.Return to text 20. The Federal Reserve System's "Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (AFed ListensEvent)" was hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in June 2019. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/conferences/conference-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-communications-20190605.htmfor the conference program, links to the conference papers and presentations, and links to session videos. A special issue of theInternational Journal of Central Banking(February 2020) included five of the seven papers presented at the conference (seehttps://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb2002.htm).Return to text 21. See the overview presented in Altig and others (2020).Return to text 22. See Caldara and others (2020).Return to text 23. The analysis of how alternative strategies that succeed in reducing the frequency and/or severity of ELB recessions can induce longer run beneficial effects on economic inequality is presented in Feiveson and others (2020).Return to text 24. Italics added for emphasis. The 2012 statement noted that the Committee would mitigate "deviations" of employment from the Committee's assessments of its maximum level, suggesting that the Committee would actively seek to lower employment if it assessed that employment was above the Committee's estimate of its maximum level. In practice, the Committee has not conducted policy in this way, but rather has supported continued gains in the labor market.Return to text 25. In addition, because real-time estimates are highly uncertain, we no longer refer to estimates of the natural rate of unemployment from the SEP in our consensus statement. Another reason for dropping this reference is that the unemployment rate does not adequately capture the full range of experience in the labor market. The SEP will continue to report FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate, as such information remains a useful, albeit highly incomplete, input into our policy deliberations.Return to text 26. This strategy embodies some key lessons from the general class of makeup strategies that have been analyzed extensively in the economics literature. The literature has emphasized that the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound poses an asymmetric challenge for monetary policy, increasing the likelihood that inflation and employment will tend to be too low. An extensive discussion about how these issues affect the design of monetary policy, as well as the relevant related literature, can be found in Duarte and others (2020), Arias and others (2020), and Hebden and others (2020).Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) View On-Demand Last week, the Federal Reserve reached an important milestone in its ongoing review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices with the unanimous approval and release of a new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.1In my remarks today, I will discuss our new framework and highlight some important policy implications that flow from the revised statement and our new strategy.2I believe that this new statement and strategy represent a critical and robust evolution of our framework that will best equip the Federal Reserve to achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis in the world in which we conduct policy today and for the foreseeable future. I will divide my remarks into four parts. First, I will discuss the factors that motivated the Federal Reserve in November 2018 to announce it would undertake in 2019 the first-ever public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Second, I will discuss the review process itself, with particular focus on the economic analysis and public input the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) drew on as it contemplated, over the past 18 months, potential changes to its policy framework. Third, I will briefly summarize the flexible inflation-targeting strategy that has been guiding U.S. monetary policy since 2012 in the context of some important changes in the economic landscape that have become evident since 2012. Fourth, I will discuss the major findings of the review as codified in our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and highlight some important policy implications that flow from them. Finally, I will offer some brief concluding remarks before joining in conversation with my good friend Adam Posen, which, as always, I very much look forward to. Motivation for the ReviewAs my FOMC colleagues and I indicated from the outset, the fact that the Federal Reserve System chose to conduct this review does not indicate that we believed we have been poorly served by the framework in place since 2012. Indeed, I would argue that over the past eight years, the framework served us well and supported the Federal Reserve's efforts after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) first to achieve and then, for several years, to sustain—until cut short this spring by the COVID-19 pandemic—the operation of the economy at or close to both our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability in what became the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Nonetheless, both the U.S. economy—and, equally importantly, our understanding of the economy—have clearly evolved along several crucial dimensions since 2012, and we believed that in 2019 it made sense to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we might refine and rethink our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and sustain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible in the global economy in which we operate today and for the foreseeable future.3 Perhaps the most significant change since 2012 in our understanding of the economy is our reassessment of the neutral real interest rate, r*, that, over the longer run, is consistent with our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. In January 2012, the median FOMC participant projected a long-run r* of 2.25 percent, which, in tandem with the inflation goal of 2 percent, indicated a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 4.25 percent. However, in the eight years since 2012, members of the Committee—as well as outside forecasters and financial market participants—have repeatedly marked down their estimates of longer-run r* and, thus, the neutral nominal policy rate.4Indeed, as of the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) released in June, the median FOMC participant currently projects a longer-run r* equal to just 0.5 percent, which implies a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 2.5 percent. Moreover, as is well appreciated, the decline in neutral policy rates since the GFC is a global phenomenon that is widely expected by forecasters and financial markets to persist for years to come.5 The substantial decline in the neutral policy rate since 2012 has critical implications for the design, implementation, and communication of Federal Reserve monetary policy because it leaves the FOMC with less conventional policy space to cut rates to offset adverse shocks to aggregate demand. With a diminished reservoir of conventional policy space, it is much more likely than was appreciated in 2012 that, in economic downturns, the effective lower bound (ELB) will constrain the ability of the FOMC to rely solely on the federal funds rate instrument to offset adverse shocks.6This development, in turn, makes it more likely that recessions will impart elevated risks of more persistent downward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on unemployment that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy should, in design and implementation, seek to offset throughout the business cycle and not just in downturns themselves.7 Two other, related developments that have also become more evident than they appeared in 2012 are that price inflation seems less responsive to resource slack, and also, that estimates of resource slack based on historically estimated price Phillips curve relationships are less reliable and subject to more material revision than was once commonly believed.8For example, in the face of declining unemployment rates that did not result in excessive cost-push pressure to price inflation, the median of the Committee's projections of u*—the rate of unemployment consistent in the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objective—has been repeatedly revised lower, from 5.5 percent in January 2012 to 4.1 percent as of the June 2020 SEP.9Projections of u* by the Congressional Budget Office and professional forecasters show a similar decline during this same period and for the same reason.10In the past several years of the previous expansion, declines in the unemployment rate occurred in tandem with a notable and, to me, welcome increase in real wages that was accompanied by an increase in labor's share of national income, but not a surge in price inflation to a pace inconsistent with our price-stability mandate and well-anchored inflation expectations. Indeed, this pattern of mid-cycle declines in unemployment coincident with noninflationary increases in real wages has been evident in the U.S. data since the 1990s.11 With regard to inflation expectations, there is broad agreement among academics and policymakers that achieving price stability on a sustainable basis requires that inflation expectations be well anchored at the rate of inflation consistent with the price-stability goal. This is especially true in the world that prevails today, with flat Phillips curves in which the primary determinant of actual inflation is expected inflation.12The pre-GFC academic literature derived the important result that a credible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy that is not constrained by the ELB can deliver, under rational expectations, inflation expectations that themselves are well anchored at the inflation target.13In other words, absent a binding ELB constraint, a policy that targets actual inflation in these models delivers long-run inflation expectations well anchored at the target "for free." But this "copacetic coincidence" no longer holds in a world of low r* in which adverse aggregate demand shocks are expected to drive the economy in at least some downturns to the ELB. In this case, which is obviously relevant today, economic analysis indicates that flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy cannot be relied on to deliver inflation expectations that are anchored at the target, but instead will tend to deliver inflation expectations that, in each business cycle, become anchored at a level below the target.14This is the crucial insight in my colleague John Williams' research with Thomas Mertens. Indeed John's research over the past 20 years on r* estimation and monetary policy design at the ELB have been enormously influential, not only in the profession but also at Fed and certainly in my own thinking about how our framework should evolve. This downward bias in inflation expectations under inflation targeting in an ELB world can in turn reduce already scarce policy space—because nominal interest rates reflect both real rates and expected inflation—and it can open up the risk of the downward spiral in both actual and expected inflation that has been observed in some other major economies. Inflation expectations are, of course, not directly observed and must be imperfectly inferred from surveys, financial market data, and econometric models. Each of these sources contains noise as well as signal, and they can and sometimes do give contradictory readings. But, at minimum, the failure of actual PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation—core or headline—over the past eight years to reach the 2 percent goal on a sustained basis cannot have contributed favorably to keeping inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. Indeed, my reading of the evidence is that the various measures of inflation expectations I follow reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal.15 The Review ProcessWith this brief overview of important changes in the economic landscape since 2012, I would now like to discuss the review process itself. In November 2018, the Federal Reserve announced that in 2019 the System would undertake a wide-ranging, public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. This initiative would be the first-everpublicreview of monetary policy strategy ever undertaken by the Fed. From the outset, it was conceived that the review would build on three pillars: a series of livestreamedFed Listensevents hosted by each of the 12 Reserve Banks and the Board, a flagship research conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and a series of 13 rigorous briefings for the Committee by System staff at a succession of five consecutive FOMC meetings commencing in July 2019 and running through January 2020. TheFed Listensseries built on a long-standing practice at the Reserve Banks and the Board of hosting outreach events that included a wide range of community groups, but, by focusing on a common format in which representatives of these groups were encouraged to tell their stories about our policies' effect on their communities and daily lives, it became a potent vehicle for us to better connect with the people our policies are meant to benefit. Although many people across the System were involved in makingFed Listensthe success it was, I would be more than remiss if I did not single out Ellen Meade for her indefatigable contributions and attention to detail and organization that were essential to pulling the whole thing off. A report on theFed Listensseries is available on the Board's web site.16 The second pillar of our review, a research conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, brought together some of the world's leading academic experts in monetary economics to present bespoke papers on a range of topics central to the review. These papers and the robust discussion at the conference that they stimulated were an important input to the review process. The proceedings of the Chicago conference are available as a special January 2020 issue of theInternational Journal of Central Banking.17 The third important pillar of the review is a collection of 13 memos prepared by System staff and discussed by the Committee at a number of FOMC meetings over the past 18 months. These memos were commissioned by a System steering committee that included Jeff Fuhrer, Marc Giannoni, and David Altig, with extensive input from Trevor Reeve. Thomas Laubach chaired the steering committee, and I must note that we simply would not be here today discussing this significant evolution of our framework without Thomas and the insights, inspiration, and good judgment that he brought to the project and the review process. A collection of the staff memos prepared for the review is now available on the Board's website.18 A New Economic Landscape Compels a Framework ReThinkAs I mentioned earlier, the Committee devoted five consecutive FOMC meetings between July 2019 and January 2020 to presentations by the staff and Committee discussions of memos touching on various aspects of the framework review, and it held a lengthy discussion at the July 2020 FOMC meeting about the new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.19While it is fair to say that these Committee discussions revealed among the 17 participants a healthy range of views about and priorities for refining our framework and strategy, some common themes did emerge, and these provided the foundation for the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee discussed in July, approved last week, and released on Thursday, August 27. Broadly, we agreed that the economic landscape has changed in important ways since 2012 and that, as a result, the existing statement and the monetary policy strategy that flows from it need as well to evolve along several dimensions.20For example, under our previous flexible inflation-targeting framework, the Federal Reserve declared that the 2 percent inflation objective is "symmetric." This term has been interpreted by many observers to mean that the Committee's reaction function aimed to be symmetric on either side of the 2 percent inflation goal, and that the FOMC set policy with the (ex ante) aim that the 2 percent goal should represent an inflation ceiling in economic expansions following economic downturns in which inflation falls below target. Regarding the ELB, the previous statement was silent on the global decline in neutral policy rates, the likelihood that the ELB will constrain monetary policy space in economic downturns, and the implications of this constraint for our ability to achieve our dual-mandate goals. As for inflation expectations, the previous statement did discuss expected inflation, but only in the context of mentioning that the announcement of a 2 percent goal helps anchor inflation expectations. While this is certainly true, it does beg the deeper question of how well anchored inflation expectations can be if the 2 percent goal is seen by the public as—and turns out ex post to be—a ceiling. Regarding the maximum-employment leg of the dual mandate, the previous statement's discussion of minimizing "deviations" of employment from its maximum level does not adequately reflect how the FOMC has actually conducted monetary policy in recent years—before the pandemic—as the actual unemployment rate was declining and, for several years, remained below SEP median projections of u* (although, to be sure, the earlier statement did acknowledge that it can be difficult to estimate the maximum level of employment with precision).21 The New Statement and StrategyBefore discussing how our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy has evolved, let me highlight some important elements that remain unchanged. First and foremost, our policy framework and strategy remain focused exclusively on meeting the dual mandate assigned to us by the Congress. Second, our statement continues to note that the maximum level of employment that we are mandated to achieve is not directly measurable and changes over time for reasons unrelated to monetary policy. Hence, we continue not to specify a numerical goal for our employment objective as we do for inflation. Third, we continue to state that an inflation rate of 2 percent over the longer run is most consistent with our mandate to promote both maximum employment and price stability. Finally, because the effect of monetary policy on the economy operates with a lag, our strategy remains forward looking. As a result, our policy actions depend on the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, and we continue in the new statement to highlight potential risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of our dual-mandate goals on a sustained basis. With respect to the new framework itself, the statement now notes that the neutral level of the federal funds rate has declined relative to its historical average and therefore that the policy rate is more likely than in the past to be constrained by its ELB, and, moreover, that this binding ELB constraint is likely to impart downside risks to inflation and employment that the Committee needs to consider in implementing its monetary policy strategy. In this regard, the statement now highlights that the Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its dual-mandate objectives.22 Regarding the maximum-employment mandate, the new statement now acknowledges that maximum employment is a "broad-based and inclusive goal" and continues to state that the FOMC considers a wide range of indicators to assess the level of maximum employment consistent with this broad-based goal. However, under our new framework, policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "shortfallsof employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations."23This change conveys our judgment that a low unemployment rate by itself, in the absence of evidence that price inflation is running or is likely to run persistently above mandate-consistent levels or pressing financial stability concerns, will not, under our new framework, be a sufficient trigger for policy action.24This is a robust evolution in the Federal Reserve's policy framework and, to me, reflects the reality that econometric models of maximum employment, while essential inputs to monetary policy, can be and have been wrong, and, moreover, that a decision to tighten monetary policy based solely on a model without any other evidence of excessive cost-push pressure that puts the price-stability mandate at risk is difficult to justify, given the significant cost to the economy if the model turns out to be wrong and given the ability of monetary policy to respond if the model were eventually to turn out to be right.25 With regard to the price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations "well anchoredat 2 percent"(and not just "well anchored") in a world of low r* and an ELB constraint that is binding in downturns.26To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at 2 percent, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." This is the second robust evolution of our framework, and it reflects the inherent asymmetry of conducting monetary policy in a low r* world with an ELB constraint that binds in economic downturns. As discussed earlier, if policy seeks only to return inflation to 2 percent following a downturn in which the ELB has constrained policy, an inflation-targeting monetary policy will tend to generate inflation that averages less than 2 percent, which, in turn, will tend to put persistent downward pressure on inflation expectations and, potentially, on available policy space. In order to offset this downward bias, our new framework recognizes that monetary policy during economic expansions needs to "aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." In other words, the aim to achievesymmetricoutcomesfor inflation (as would be the case under flexible inflation targeting in the absence of the ELB constraint) requires anasymmetricmonetary policy reaction function in a low r* world with binding ELB constraints in economic downturns. It is for this reason that while our new statement no longer refers to the 2 percent inflation goal as symmetric, it does now say that the Committee "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time." To be clear, "inflation that averages 2 percent over time" represents an ex ante aspiration, not a description of a mechanical reaction function—nor is it a commitment to conduct monetary policy tethered to any particular formula or rule.27Indeed, as summarized in the minutes of the September 2019 FOMC meeting, the Committee (and, certainly, I) was skeptical about the benefit, credibility, or practicality of adopting a formal numerical price level or average inflation target rule, just as it has been unwilling to implement its existing flexible inflation-targeting strategy via any sort of mechanical rule.28So in practice, what, then, is the policy implication of this stated desire "to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time"? Again, the implication of our new strategy for monetary policy is stated explicitly in the new statement, and, at the risk of repeating myself, let me restate it verbatim: "… following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." Full stop. As Chair Powell indicated in his remarks last week, we think of this new strategy as an evolution from flexible inflation targeting to flexible average inflation targeting.29 Concluding ThoughtsMy remarks today have been focused on our new framework and flexible average inflation targeting strategy. Of course, our review has also explored ways in which we might add to our toolkit and refine our communication practices. With regard to our toolkit, we believe that forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases have been and continue to be effective sources of support to the economy when the federal funds rate is at the ELB, and, of course, both were deployed promptly in our March 2020 policy response to the pandemic. With regard to other monetary policy tools, and as we have made clear previously in the minutes to our October 2019 FOMC meeting, we do not see negative policy rates as an attractive policy option in the U.S. context.30As for targeting the yield curve, our general view is that with credible forward guidance and asset purchases, the potential benefits from such an approach may be modest. At the same time, the approach brings complications in terms of implementation and communications. Hence, as noted in the minutes from our previous meeting (July 2020), most of my colleagues judged that yield caps and targets were not warranted in the current environment but should remain an option that the Committee could reassess in the future if circumstances changed markedly.31Regarding communication practices, our new consensus statement does bring greater clarity and transparency to the way we will conduct policy going forward, and in that regard I note that Michelle Smith is leading our efforts to make immediately and readily available on the web a bounty of content that will be invaluable to those who desire a more granular understanding of the review process. Finally, now that we have ratified our new statement, the Committee can assess possible refinements to our SEP with the aim of reaching a decision on any potential changes by the end of this year.32 In closing, let me say that while I was not a member of the Committee in 2012, had I been I would have voted enthusiastically for the January 2012 statement. It was the right statement, and flexible inflation targeting was the right strategy, at that time and for the next eight years. The existing framework served us well by supporting the Federal Reserve's efforts after the GFC first to achieve and then, for several years, to sustain the operation of the economy at or close to both our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability. But times change, as has the economic landscape, and our framework and strategy need to change as well.33My colleagues and I believe that this new framework represents a critical and robust evolution of our monetary policy strategy that will best equip the Federal Reserve to achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis in the world in which we conduct policy today and for the foreseeable future. Thank you very much for your time and attention, and I look forward now to my conversation with Adam. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 333–75. Abraham, Katharine G., John C. Haltiwanger, and Lea E. Rendell (2020). "How Tight Is the U.S. Labor Market? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 19. Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52. Ajello, Andrea, Isabel Cairó, Vasco Cúrdia, Thomas A. Lubik, and Albert Queralto (2020). "Monetary Policy Tradeoffs and the FOMC's Dual Mandate (PDF)a," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-066. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Altig, David, Jeff Fuhrer, Marc P. Giannoni, and Thomas Laubach (2020). "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Framework: A Roadmap (PDF)," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 27. Arias, Jonas, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, and Thorsten Drautzburg (2020). "Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"AEA Papers and Proceedings,vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederick S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Bianchi, Francesco, Leonardo Melosi, and Matthias Rottner (2019). "Hitting the Elusive Inflation Target (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 26279. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September (revised January 2020). Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020).Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public (PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, June. Caldara, Dario, Etienne Gagnon, Enrique Martínez-García, and Christopher J. Neely (2020). "Monetary Policy and Economic Performance since the Financial Crisis (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-065. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Campbell, Jeffrey, Thomas B. King, Anna Orlik, and Rebecca Zarutskie (2020). "Issues regarding the Use of the Policy Rate Tool (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-070. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Carlson, Mark, Stefania D'Amico, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Bernd Schlusche, and Paul Wood (2020). "Issues in the Use of the Balance Sheet Tool (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF),report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2019). "Improving U.S. Monetary Policy Communications (PDF)," paper presented at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (aFed Listensevent), held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 4. Chung, Hess, Brian M. Doyle, James Hebden, and Michael Siemer (2020). "Considerations regarding Inflation Ranges (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-075. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019). "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2016). "Good News for the Fed,"International Economy, Spring, pp. 44–45 and 75–76. ——— (2018a). "Outlook for the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 25. ——— (2018b). "Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27. ——— (2019a). "Monetary Policy Outlook for 2019," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, January 10, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/clarida20190110a.htm. ——— (2019b). "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 22. ——— (2019c). "Models, Markets, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference "Strategies for Monetary Policy," Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., May 3. ——— (2020). "Financial Markets and Monetary Policy: Is There a Hall of Mirrors Problem?" speech delivered at the 2020 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 21. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707. Crump, Richard K., Christopher J. Nekarda, and Nicholas Petrosky-Nadeau (2020). "Unemployment Rate Benchmarks (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-072. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti (2017). "Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 235–94. ——— (2019). "Global Trends in Interest Rates,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 118 (May), pp. 248–62. Duarte, Fernando, Benjamin K. Johannsen, Leonardo Melosi, and Taisuke Nakata (2020). "Strengthening the FOMC's Framework in View of the Effective Lower Bound and Some Considerations Related to Time-Inconsistent Strategies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-067. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Eberly, Janice C., James H. Stock, and Jonathan H. Wright (2020). "The Federal Reserve's Current Framework for Monetary Policy: A Review and Assessment (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 16 (February), pp. 5–71. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 139–233. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,Handbook of Economic Forecasting,vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56. Feiveson, Laura, Nils Goernemann, Julie Hotchkiss, Karel Mertens, and Jae Sim (2020). "Distributional Considerations for Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Fischer, Stanley (2016). "Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17. Fuhrer, Jeff, Giovanni P. Olivei, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell (2018). "Should the Federal Reserve Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 443–97. Goldberg, Jonathan, Elizabeth Klee, Edward Simpson Prescott, and Paul Wood (2020). "Monetary Policy Strategy and Tools: Financial Stability Considerations (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-074. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Gust, Christopher, Edward Herbst, David López-Salido, and Matthew E. Smith (2017). "The Empirical Implications of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,"American Economic Review,vol. 107 (July), pp. 1971–2006. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2016). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 64 (4), pp. 660–707. Hebden, James, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020). "How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Heise, Sebastian, Fatih Karahan, and Ayşegül Şahin (2020). "The Missing Inflation Puzzle: The Role of the Wage-Price Pass-Through," NBER Working Paper Series 27663. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2018). "A Time Series Model of Interest Rates with the Effective Lower Bound (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 715. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April. Kashyap, Anil K., and Caspar Siegert (2020). "Financial Stability Considerations and Monetary Policy (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 16 (February), pp. 231–66. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 317–72. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Krugman, Paul R. (1998). "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 2, pp. 137–87. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2016). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-011. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. López-Salido, David, Gerardo Sanz-Maldonado, Carly Schippits, and Min Wei (2020). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: The Role of Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 19. Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H. Stock (2014). "Empirical Evidence on Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 52 (March), pp. 124–88. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019). Obstfeld, Maurice (2020). "Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 16 (February), pp. 73–132. Pfajfar, Damjan, and John M. Roberts (2018). "The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Powell, Jerome H. (2019a). "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., March 8. ——— (2019b). "Opening Remarks: Challenges for Monetary Policy (PDF)." In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed., "Challenges for Monetary Policy,"A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22–24. Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City, pp. 1–16. ——— (2020). "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? (PDF)" inWorld Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 1–17. Sims, Eric, and Jing Cynthia Wu (2020). "Are QE and Conventional Monetary Policy Substitutable? (PDF)"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 16 (February), pp. 195–230. Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets,"European Economic Review,vol. 41 (June), pp. 1111–46. ——— (2020). "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF),"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 16 (February), pp. 133–93. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Wynne, Mark A., and Ren Zhang (2018). "Measuring the World Natural Rate of Interest,"Economic Inquiry,vol. 56 (January), pp. 530–44. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. 1. The revised statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf. Last week, Chair Powell made the review and the revised statement the focus of his speech at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming; see Powell (2020).Return to text 2. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Etienne Gagnon, Ellen Meade, Jon Faust, and Trevor Reeve for their assistance in preparing these remarks, and Thomas Laubach for sharing with me throughout the review process his many keen insights on monetary policy strategy and communication.Return to text 3. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review and of how the previous policy framework had served us, see Clarida (2019b). See also Powell (2019a).Return to text 4. See Chair Powell's address in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, last week (Powell, 2020) for an illustration of the revisions to the macroeconomic projections—including for the longer-run neutral federal funds rate—of FOMC participants as well as private and public forecasters. The downward revisions to r* over time have been informed, in part, by the general fall in interest rates and by econometric evidence that suggests that this fall is of a permanent rather than a cyclical nature. See, among many contributors, Hamilton and others (2016), Johannsen and Mertens (2018), Laubach and Williams (2016), Del Negro and others (2017), and López-Salido and others (2020). For discussions of the various factors that might have contributed to this fall, see Fischer (2016) and Rachel and Smith (2017).Return to text 5. For evidence on the global nature of the decline in r*, see King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Wynne and Zhang (2018); and Del Negro and others (2019). For a discussion of global considerations for U.S. monetary policy, see Obstfeld (2020).Return to text 6. For assessments of the risk that the federal funds rate will be constrained by the ELB in the future, along with policy strategies that might mitigate that risk, see Kiley and Roberts (2017); Chung and others (2019); Hebden and López-Salido (2018); and Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019).Return to text 7. For pre-GFC discussions of the macroeconomic consequences of policy rates being constrained by the ELB, see Krugman (1998), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), and Adam and Billi (2007). For the GFC and its aftermath, using a time-series approach, Eberly, Stock, and Wright (2020) estimate that, in the absence of the ELB constraint, the labor market recovery would have proceeded at a significantly more rapid pace than was observed, whereas core inflation would have been only modestly higher because of inflation's limited sensitivity to resource slack. Using a DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) approach, the mean estimates of Gust and others (2017) suggest that a binding ELB accounted for about 30 percent (roughly 2 percentage points) of the 6 percent contraction in gross domestic product in 2009 relative to the peak in 2007 and was responsible for an even larger fraction of the ensuing slow recovery.Return to text 8. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Pfajfar and Roberts (2018). The difficulties in assessing shortfalls from maximum employment using measures of the unemployment rate has motivated researchers to explore alternative approaches. See Abraham, Haltiwanger, and Rendell (2020) for an approach based on the job search and matching framework. See also the staff discussion of various concepts of unemployment rate benchmarks by Crump, Nekarda, and Petrosky-Nadeau (2020), which was prepared as background materials for this review.Return to text 9. The large degree of uncertainty attached to estimates of r*, u*, the slope of the (short-run) Phillips curve, and other key economic objects adds additional risk-management considerations in the conduct of monetary policy, especially in a low r* environment in which the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by the ELB. See Powell (2019b) for a discussion of the implications for monetary policy and my recent remarks in Clarida (2020). See also the model-based analyses of Erceg and others (2018), Ajello and others (2020), and Hebden and others (2020).Return to text 10. See Powell (2020) for an illustration. See also Caldara and others (2020) for a discussion of how repeated surprises in macroeconomic forecasts affect inference about the appropriate stance of policy.Return to text 11. See Clarida (2016, 2019c) and Heise, Karahan, and Şahin (2020) for discussions.Return to text 12. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy and Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of longer-run inflation expectations help predict inflation. Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock (2014) discuss the challenges of identifying the precise role of expectations in determining actual inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of indicators in determining the implications for monetary policy of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.Return to text 13. See Bernanke and others (1999) for a review of the considerations that led to the adoption of inflation-targeting frameworks and the early international experience. See Svensson (1997), Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999), and Woodford (2003) for conceptual treatments of inflation targeting, including of rational expectations.Return to text 14. See Mertens and Williams (2019) and Bianchi, Melosi, and Rottner (2019).Return to text 15. See Clarida (2020).Return to text 16. See Board of Governors (2020).Return to text 17. This special issue, which includes five of the seven papers presented at the research conference, is available on the journal's website athttps://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb2002.htm. The conference program, conference drafts, presentations, and video recordings of the sessions can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/conferences/conference-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-communications-20190605.htm.Return to text 18. An overview of the System staff work in support of the review is presented in Altig and others (2020). Federal Reserve staff analysis on theFed Listensinitiative was presented and discussed at the December 2019 FOMC meeting and is part of theFed Listensreport.Return to text 19. Summaries of these discussions can be found in the minutes of these FOMC meetings, which are accessible on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 20. The FOMC published the statement for the first time alongside its January 2012 postmeeting statement; the document is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20120125c.htm. This statement has been reaffirmed each year, and was updated in 2016 to include the language on symmetry. The version of the statement that prevailed at the start of the review, which was affirmed in January 2019, can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130b.htm.Return to text 21. See my earlier remarks on these aspects in Clarida (2018a, 2018b, 2019a).Return to text 22. FOMC participants discussed the benefits, limitations, and risks associated with policy tools other than the setting of the federal funds rate target at various points during the review. See, notably, the summaries of FOMC participants' discussions at the July 2019 and October 2019 meetings—available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm—which covered, respectively, the performance of these tools during the GFC and its aftermath and issues pertaining to the use of these tools in the future. See also the analyses of Sims and Wu (2020), Caldara and others (2020), Campbell and others (2020), and Carlson and others (2020), prepared for this review.Return to text 23. Italics added for emphasis.Return to text 24. For a discussion of financial stability considerations in the conduct of monetary policy, see Kashyap and Siegert (2020) and Goldberg and others (2020), prepared as part of this review.Return to text 25. As I stated in Clarida (2019a, paragraph 17), "For example, were models to predict a surge in inflation, a decision for preemptive hikes before the surge is evident in actual data would need to be balanced against the cost of the model being wrong." One major cost of withdrawing policy accommodation prematurely during an economic expansion is that it prevents job opportunities from reaching all communities. A clear takeaway from ourFed Listensevents is that the strong job market that preceded the pandemic was especially beneficial to members of low- and moderate-income communities. The prolonged economic expansion not only helped create job opportunities for marginalized groups and cement their attachment to the labor force, but, as we heard at these events, it also more generally strengthened families, businesses, and communities. See Aaronson and others (2019) for a discussion of how a strong labor market helped address labor market disparities in the previous economic expansion. See also Feiveson and others (2020) for a discussion of distributional considerations and monetary policy.Return to text 26. Italics added for emphasis.Return to text 27. The absence of a commitment to a specific formula or rule should not be interpreted as the absence of a commitment to achieving our mandated goals. To the contrary, the revised statement has strengthened our commitment to achieving these goals in several important ways. Notably, it has clarified that we seek to achieve 2 percent inflation, on average, over time and that, when inflation has been running persistently too low, it is appropriate to aim for inflation outcomes moderately above 2 percent for some time to solidly anchor longer-run inflation expectations at 2 percent. The revised statement also emphasizes our resolve to use our full range of tools to achieve our goals. Clarity about our goals, strategy, and tools fosters greater democratic accountability in the pursuit of our dual mandate. For a discussion of time-consistency issues in monetary policy, see the staff analysis of Duarte and others (2020), prepared for this review.Return to text 28. A summary of the September 2019 FOMC discussion is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For the staff analysis presented as background to that discussion, see Arias and others (2020), Duarte and others (2020), and Hebden and others (2020). See also the related staff analysis by Chung and others (2020) on the use of operational inflation ranges.Return to text 29. Svensson (2020) argues that "forecast targeting" approaches, by which policymakers set the federal funds rate so as to best stabilize forecasts for inflation and employment around the FOMC's longer-run goals, outperform policy strategies that respond only to current economic conditions, past economic conditions, or both. In addition, he finds that average inflation targeting offers some advantages over the other strategies that he considers.Return to text 30. The minutes of the FOMC's October 2019 meeting are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 31. See the minutes of the FOMC's June 2020 and July 2020 meetings, which can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 32. For a discussion of the importance of clear Federal Reserve communications in an uncertain economic environment, along with possible enhancements, see the paper Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2019) prepared for the research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.Return to text 33. See Fuhrer and others (2018) for a discussion of the benefits of holding periodic reviews of central banks' monetary policy frameworks.Return to text Guide to changes in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy
Governor Lael Brainard At the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is a pleasure to be here today with Esther George and Ken Montgomery to talk about the future of America's retail payment system. Recognizing that the retail payment infrastructure touches every American, a year ago, the Federal Reserve committed to build its first major new payment system in four decades. At that time, no one anticipated the challenges our nation would soon face. The COVID-19 pandemic has heightened the urgency and importance of delivering a resilient instant payment system that is accessible to all Americans.1 The COVID-19 pandemic is taking a tremendous toll on communities across America, especially households and small businesses with the least liquid resources to weather the storm.2Emergency relief payments authorized in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, provided a vital lifeline for many households.3The rapid expenditure of the COVID emergency relief payments highlights the critical urgency of immediate access to funds for the many households and businesses managing cash-flow constraints. After sharply reducing their spending early in the COVID crisis, many households increased their spending starting on the day they received the emergency relief payments and continued for the following 10 days.4The rapid increase in spending was greatest for households with lower incomes, greater income declines, and lower liquid savings.5 The urgency with which the emergency payments were spent underscores the importance of rapid access to funds for many households and businesses that face cash flow constraints. The Federal Reserve, acting as Fiscal Agent for the U.S. Department of the Treasury, processed most of the CARES Act payments to households using direct deposit, prepaid debit cards, and checks, which can take several days between the time the funds are sent and the time recipients get access to their funds. By contrast, the ability to disburse funds via instant payments could have helped reduce the strain for those who needed the funds quickly in order to meet financial obligations. The same is true for other payments intended to provide immediate assistance, for example, in the wake of natural disasters. In good times as well as bad, instant payments will enable millions of American households and small businesses to get instant access to funds, rather than waiting days for checks to clear. An instant payment infrastructure ensures the funds are available immediately, which could be especially important for households on fixed incomes or living paycheck to paycheck, when waiting days for the funds to be available to pay a bill can mean overdraft fees or late fees that can compound, or reliance on costly sources of credit. For small businesses, the ability to receive customer payments instantly could help them manage cash flows when working capital is tied up in materials or inventory. And for the 1 in 10 Americans who regularly work in the gig economy, getting immediate access to the payments for their work could help address cash-flow constraints when money is tight.6 FedNowSMServiceConsumers and businesses across the country want and expect instant payments, and the banks they trust should be able to provide this service securely. One year ago, the Federal Reserve announced we would build the FedNow Service to enable banks of every size and in every community in America to provide safe and efficient instant payment services around the clock, every day of the year.7The FedNow Service will facilitate end-to-end instant payment services for consumers and businesses, increase competition, and ensure equitable access to banks of all sizes nationwide. The Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to build an instant payment infrastructure, given our long history of operating payment systems to promote a safe, efficient, and broadly accessible payment infrastructure. The decision to build an instant payment infrastructure reflected support from a broad set of stakeholders, including the vast majority of over 400 commenters that responded to the Board's 2018 notice, as well as the U.S. Treasury.8Our public mission in providing payment services is built on the proposition that all banks and the communities they serve, no matter their size or geographic location, should have equitable access to the U.S. payment system. Through the direct connections that we have with more than 10,000 banks, the FedNow Service will be broadly accessible to banks and the communities they serve across the country. The FedNow Service will not only expand but also strengthen the U.S. payment infrastructure by operating alongside the private-sector instant payment service, the Clearing House's RTP network. As they do for other payment services, many banks may choose to maintain access to more than one instant payment service to attain resiliency through redundancy. Moreover, the Federal Reserve has always had a vital role in the payment system by providing liquidity and operational continuity in times of stress, and the FedNow Service will extend this role directly into the instant payment market. Together, the FedNow and RTP services should significantly increase the speed and efficiency of the U.S. payment system. The presence of more than one service provider also brings the efficiency benefits associated with competition and benefits consumers, according to analysis from the U.S. Government Accountability Office.9 The First Year of ProgressSince last August, the Federal Reserve has made substantial strides in developing the FedNow Service, including on the evaluation of prototypes of the core clearing and settlement functionality. Across the Federal Reserve System, work has continued apace, commensurate with the high priority of the initiative, even as we have mobilized an unprecedented response to the COVID-19 shock. We have a team of over 100 people working on the program, including experts drawn from across the Federal Reserve System and key external hires. Since we initiated the FedNow Service one year ago, we have been meeting our project milestones, and today I am pleased to announce the Federal Reserve Board has approved the core features and functionality based on extensive input from stakeholders. The FedNow Service design we are announcing today benefited tremendously from industry feedback, including almost 200 comment letters responding to our notice regarding desired features and functionality. In addition to the core interbank clearing and settlement functionality that will enable consumers and businesses to send and receive instant payments through participating banks, the FedNow Service will include features that enhance the usability of the service. We heard loud and clear from stakeholders the primary importance of getting this service to the market as quickly as possible. To meet this goal, we are announcing a phased approach that will enable the FedNow Service to get to market expeditiously with a core set of features and to expand available features over time in response to changes in technology and market needs. Let me highlight several key features of the initial service offering. First, we heard strong support for fraud tools within the FedNow Service to support banks' efforts to mitigate the risk of fraud with instant payments. Accordingly, upon implementation, banks will be able proactively to set parameters that limit transaction activity in the FedNow Service based on banks' knowledge of their own customers. As we gain insights from banks' experience with the initial set of fraud tools, we will explore other tools that may be valuable, including centralized monitoring by the FedNow Service. Second, banks told us they want to be able to ensure they have adequate funds in their Federal Reserve accounts on a 24x7x365 basis to cover outflows related to instant payments, especially during hours when existing payment services are not open and funds cannot be transferred into Federal Reserve accounts to cover intraday overdrafts. Accordingly, we will develop a liquidity management tool that allows a participant with excess funds in its Federal Reserve account to transfer funds to another participant who needs the funds on weekends, holidays, and after hours. Moreover, we will make the liquidity management tool available for instant payments broadly, including to banks that choose not to participate in the FedNow Service. Participants in a private-sector instant payments service will be able to use the tool to transfer funds from their Federal Reserve accounts to the joint account at a Reserve Bank that backs settlement in that service. Third, it will be important for the FedNow Service to be interoperable with the private-sector instant payment service to accomplish the goal of nationwide reach for instant payments. As we have learned from experience with our other payment services, the form and timeline for achieving interoperability will depend on the level of commitment and engagement from stakeholders across the industry, including the operators of other instant payment settlement services, both present and future. In part to facilitate interoperability, the FedNow Service design will use the widely accepted ISO 20022 message standard and other industry best practices.10To the extent other instant payment services fully adopt the same publicly available, widely accepted standards, this approach would enable a form of interoperability where banks can route payments through either the FedNow Service or other instant payment services based on the available path to the receiver. This is similar to the prevailing approach in payment card transactions, for instance. We are also open to collaborating on a form of interoperability where messages can be exchanged between the FedNow Service and private-sector instant payment service operators, similar to the approach used in automated clearinghouse (ACH) systems. Implementing this approach would significantly increase the required level of commitment and active engagement of the private-sector instant payment service operator from the outset. In order to minimize time to market, additional features of the FedNow Service would be introduced in phases after launch. It will be important for the FedNow Service to support alias-based payments, whereby a payment can be sent to a recipient using an alias, such as an email address or phone number, rather than requiring an account number. But providing this feature securely requires addressing legal, operational, and security challenges that would increase the time to market for the core service. Balancing these considerations, we will explore the best ways to add a directory service or other approach to alias-based payments with the goal of providing this feature as a high priority following the initial launch. The Road AheadAs we proceed with the development of the FedNow Service, we will continue our engagement with a broad set of stakeholders to gain input on desired features and to work with banks and their service providers on preparations to adopt the service. In May, the Federal Reserve Banks announced the formation of the FedNow Community for stakeholders who would like to help inform the development of the FedNow Service.11The Community currently has over 500 members from all segments of the payment ecosystem. We are working with service providers, recognizing their importance in providing essential payment processing services for thousands of banks in this country. We are also engaging directly with the fintech and software companies who provide customer-facing services that will help banks build innovative instant payment products to serve their communities. The readiness of these stakeholders to support banks' participation in the FedNow Service and expand potential uses through value-added services is key to widespread adoption of instant payments. We look forward to our continued partnership with banks and other stakeholders in this transformative initiative to deliver a safe and efficient instant payment system with national reach. It has been an eventful year for retail payments with technology players introducing new business models and accelerating the pace of digitalization. As the central bank, our focus on the safety and integrity of the payment system means we need to ensure that payment innovations do not come at the cost of security, reliability, or consumer protections. Some newer payment services, while providing what has the look and feel of an instant payment experience for consumers, in fact rely on legacy infrastructure that actually settles transactions on a deferred basis, creating risk for consumers, banks, and the payment system overall. In contrast, the FedNow Service will offer real-time gross settlement of transactions, an approach that involves each transaction being processed individually and immediately, which avoids interbank credit risk. Efforts by global stablecoin networks such as Facebook's Libra project to drive the next stage of payment innovation have raised other fundamental questions about legal and regulatory safeguards, financial stability, and the appropriate role of private money.12The Federal Reserve remains optimistic about the power of technology and innovation to deliver payments safely, immediately, and efficiently when the appropriate safeguards are in place.13We are committed to building an instant payment system that delivers the payment speed that users want without bypassing the legal and regulatory protections they have come to expect from banking relationships. Ultimately, the FedNow Service can be a catalyst for innovation in the market by providing a neutral platform on which the private sector can build to offer safe, efficient instant payment services to users across the country. The promise of the FedNow Service is that it will provide a modern payment infrastructure for the future, bringing the benefits of instant payments to communities across America and improving the way households, businesses, and government agencies make payments for many years to come. 1.I am grateful to Kirstin Wells of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.For information on the impact of COVID-19 on communities around the country, see Federal Reserve System,FedListens, Perspectives from the Public (PDF)(Federal Reserve System, June 2020); and Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, "Double Jeopardy: COVID-19's Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (PDF)," Brief (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020).Return to text 3.Bhutta, Blair, Dettling, and Moore(2020) show that in the absence of the CARES Act, only half of families suffering job loss would have been able to finance spending for six months using only liquid savings and standard unemployment benefits, while 94 percent of families would be able to maintain spending for six months with additional benefits from the CARES Act.Return to text 4.Baker, Farrokhnia, Meyer, Pagel, and Yannelis (2020) examine a panel of households using a financial planning app and find that these households responded quickly to CARES Act stimulus payments; see Scott R. Baker, R.A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis, "Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments," NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020).Return to text 5.See also Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan, "Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from Covid-19 Stimulus Payments," Working Paper Series 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May 2020); and Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team, "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data (PDF)," Opportunity Insights Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: Opportunity Insights, May 2020).Return to text 6.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020 (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2020).Return to text 7.Lael Brainard, "Delivering Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Town Hall, August 5, 2019); "Supporting Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018).Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments, 84 Fed. Reg. 39,297 (PDF)(August 9, 2019).Return to text 8.Potential Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments, Request for Comments, 83 Fed. Reg. 57,351(Nov. 15, 2018). U.S. Treasury,A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunity: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF)(Department of the Treasury, July 2018), 156–157.Return to text 9.The GAO found that competition by the Federal Reserve in payment markets has generally had a positive impact, with benefits that include lowered cost of processing payments for end users. U.S. Government Accountability Office, GAO-16-614,Federal Reserve's Competition with Other Providers Benefits Customers, but Additional Reviews Could Increase Assurance of Cost Accuracy, GAO-16-614 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, August 2016).Return to text 10.The ISO 20022 standard is a message format standard for payments, securities, trade services, payment cards, and foreign exchange. For more information, seehttps://www.iso20022.org/.Return to text 11.See the FedNow Community press release, Federal Reserve, "Federal Reserve Announces FedNowSMCommunity," press release, May 6, 2020.Return to text 12.Lael Brainard, "Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape" (remarks at The Future of Money in the Digital Age, Sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and Princeton University's Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, D.C., October 16, 2019).Return to text 13.Lael Brainard, "The Digitalization of Payments and Currency: Some Issues for Consideration" (speech at the Symposium on the Future of Payments, Stanford, Calif., February 5, 2020).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Kansas Bankers Association CEO and Senior Management Forum/Annual Meeting, Topeka, Kansas (via webcast) Good afternoon. It's great to be with you, and I look forward to our discussion. As you all know, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruption and hardship in nearly every aspect of our lives, and it continues to weigh heavily on our national economy, which is why it will be the central focus of my remarks here today. Let me set the stage for our discussion by outlining the economic effects of the pandemic most relevant to the banking sector, describing the Federal Reserve's response to the crisis, and then making some observations about conditions for smaller banks. The Pandemic's Effects on the Economy and BankingWe began this year with the economy in excellent shape—by some measures the strongest in decades. From my seat as a monetary policymaker, we appeared to be in a good position regarding both legs of our dual mandate, which are maximum employment and stable prices. But that picture was dramatically altered with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Efforts to contain the spread of the virus caused a sudden stop in economic activity during March and April. While the extent of the closures and shutdowns varied widely throughout the country, the sudden loss of employment and the contraction in output were like nothing our nation has experienced before. The decline in activity was mostly due to temporary business closures, and the economy has bounced back noticeably in recent months as businesses reopen and fiscal support was distributed to many Americans. Even so, the economy is still far from back to normal. The future course and timing of the recovery is still highly uncertain, and its pace and intensity are likely to vary across areas of the country—heavily influenced by the decisions of state and local governments. That speaks to another aspect of this episode that is unusual—how the timing and severity of the pandemic's impact seem to differ greatly from one area to the next. Among Kansas's major industries, oil and gas production and equipment manufacturing have been hurt by the worldwide slump in energy demand. Aviation manufacturing has been hit hard by the downturn and by the uncertainty over the recovery in air travel. Agriculture continues to face challenges but is faring somewhat better than many sectors of the economy. Ag producers are still facing tough financial conditions, including the low commodity price environment. While most indications are that agriculture land prices continue to hold fairly steady, I have seen some reports that less-productive land has been showing some hints of cracks in valuations. Turning to employment, nationwide, we know that the initial job losses were heavily concentrated among the most financially vulnerable, including lower-wage workers, young people, women, and minority groups. According to the Fed's latestReport on The Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households, 20 percent of people surveyed in April reported a recent job loss. Among those surveyed who live in households with annual incomes below $40,000, the reported job loss was nearly double that, at around 40 percent.1That said, both of those figures are likely to include a number of layoffs due to pandemic-related shutdowns of businesses that were hopefully only temporary. Households were in a generally strong financial position at the beginning of this year, but the restrictions implemented to fight COVID-19 resulted in an unprecedented spike in unemployment, which likely led to a number of families finding it difficult to keep up with their payment obligations. That is especially true for lower-income households, which may have had much less of a financial cushion before the onset of the crisis. Along with our monetary policy actions, stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment benefits provided in the CARES Act have been a substantial and timely source of financial support to households during this difficult time. Understanding the financial stress this could place on many borrowers, the Fed and other federal regulators implemented guidance to encourage banks to work with their borrowers. By mid-July, only around 8 percent of outstanding residential mortgage loans were in forbearance, well below what many industry observers had feared. It remains possible that the economic challenges will persist beyond the forbearance time period provided in the CARES Act, and if so, we would almost certainly see some of these loans transition into longer-term delinquency status or enter into renewed deferment periods. Thus far, however, the data have been encouraging. Turning to the impact on businesses, we know the effects have been most severe in the services sector, especially travel, leisure, and hospitality. To give some sense of the losses, employment in the leisure and hospitality sectors nationwide was down nearly 40 percent in the 12 months through May and still down about 25 percent through July. Retail employment fell 15 percent over March and April, though it has recovered substantially since then, and in July it was 6 percent below the pre-COVID level. It is encouraging to see that even those sectors most heavily affected by the crisis are finding ways to innovate. Stores are adjusting hours and ramping up delivery, restaurants are changing menus and creating outdoor space, distilleries shifted from making bourbon to hand sanitizers, and independent businesses that hadn't previously relied heavily on technology are now using it to stay connected to customers and regulate workflow. Timely and supportive fiscal and monetary policy measures also have helped, but with the progress of the recovery still tentative, I expect that many businesses will continue to fight for survival in the months ahead, with the support of their lenders and communities. Looking ahead, the economic outlook will continue to evolve quickly. We experienced a pronounced and very welcome bounceback in national retail spending and housing activity over the early summer months. We also saw positive news on progress toward a vaccine and in the effective treatment of patients. Even so, positive cases and hospitalizations have risen in some areas and continue to weigh on some regions and the overall economy. As Chair Powell has noted, the timeline for the recovery is highly uncertain and will depend heavily on the course of the pandemic. We must therefore recognize that progress toward a full recovery in economic activity may well be slow and uneven The Fed's Response to the PandemicNow let me turn to the Federal Reserve's role in the government's response to the pandemic. During the initial phase of the crisis, we took a number of actions to stabilize financial markets that came under intense stress, including purchasing sizable amounts of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities. To support households and businesses, the Fed quickly lowered our target for the federal funds rate, which has helped to lower borrowing costs but created a different challenge for financial institutions—depressed net interest margins. The Fed has also supported actions by Congress and the administration by creating a number of new emergency lending programs. These programs were designed to restore and sustain proper functioning in certain financial markets that had seized up in March and to facilitate the continued flow of credit from banks to households and businesses. One federal stimulus program that relied heavily on the participation and expertise of community bankers is the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Working through banks, the PPP program has delivered more than $500 billion to small businesses to help them weather the storm. Community bankers played a crucial role in getting these funds to businesses that needed it, showing once again how essential community banks are to the customers they serve. And in response to feedback we received from a number of community bankers, the Fed created the PPP lending facility to alleviate balance-sheet capacity issues for banks that otherwise would not have been able to provide PPP loans to their small-business customers. The PPP was created to help small businesses keep their employees on staff, and the Main Street Lending program is designed to support lending to mid-sized businesses through the recovery. The Federal Reserve has not engaged in lending directly to businesses before, but it was a step that seemed appropriate considering the breadth and depth of the challenges we face. We continue to solicit feedback and make adjustments to the program based on the suggestions received from bankers and other stakeholders, and we continue to welcome your thoughts and ideas on how we can make Main Street more effective. I would be interested to visit with those who may already have experience with this new loan program, and I would also be interested to hear about how you plan to use it to meet the needs of your business customers. Together, these policy actions have helped stabilize financial markets, boost consumer and business sentiment, and assist millions of households and thousands of businesses harmed by the response to the pandemic. Credit markets, which had seized up earlier this year, have resumed functioning. In our other role as a prudential regulator and bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve took several steps intended to reduce burden on banks and help them focus on the needs of their customers and communities. Together, with our fellow federal regulators, we delayed the impact of the CECL accounting standard in our capital rules and temporarily eased the leverage ratio requirement for community banks. We also delayed reporting dates for Call Reports and other data collections. In addition, to address concerns about real estate appraisal delays, we provided temporary relief from certain appraisal requirements. From a supervisory perspective, beginning in late March the Fed paused examinations for most small banks and took steps to lengthen remediation timeframes for outstanding issues. We considered the exam pause an important step to provide bankers time to adjust operations to protect the health of customers and employees, to prioritize the financial needs of their customers and communities, and to play an essential and vital role in implementing critical relief programs like the PPP. As we continue to support the recovery and work to ensure that supervision and examination is as effective and efficient as possible, I think it's important to hear directly from you, who are actually working in the economy, about the conditions facing your communities and any challenges impeding your ability to meet the needs of your customers. In addition to my regular outreach to community banks, I am currently engaged in an effort to speak with every CEO of the more than 650 community banks supervised by the Fed. I want to hear directly from bankers about what you are seeing and your thoughts and ideas about the recovery. These conversations are incredibly valuable to me as a bank regulator and policymaker. They give context to the mountains of data we analyze and a unique perspective with real-world local examples to a complex and dynamic economic picture. For those of you from Fed member banks who I have not yet had the opportunity to meet or speak with by phone in these times of COVID, I look forward to our conversation. Your local Reserve Bank will be in contact to find a convenient time for us to meet. Conditions for Smaller BanksThis audience knows better than most that smaller banks entered the pandemic in strong condition. At the end of 2019, over 95 percent of community and regional banks supervised by the Fed were rated a 1 or 2 under the CAMELS rating system. After coming through the last financial crisis in generally stronger condition than larger banks, smaller institutions had strengthened their capital positions and substantially improved asset quality in the years since, leaving them better positioned to deal with the current stress related to the pandemic. Likewise, credit concentrations, especially in construction and commercial real estate, were lower for smaller banks than at the outset of the last financial crisis, and risk management of concentrations improved over the last decade. Smaller banks also entered the pandemic with high levels of liquidity, and this liquidity has further improved with deposit inflows associated with pandemic-related stimulus programs. Overall, community and regional banks remain well positioned to continue to extend credit and play an essential role in supporting our nation's recovery from the effects of COVID-19. With this in mind, on June 15 the Federal Reserve announced our plan to resume bank examinations. We recognize the unique and challenging conditions under which the industry has been operating, and we will certainly consider that as we resume examinations. Our initial focus will be to assess higher risk banks, particularly those with credit concentrations in higher risk or stressed industries. Finally, we will continue to be sensitive to the capacity of each bank to participate in examinations and strive to prevent undue burden on banks struggling with crisis-related operational challenges. The Road AheadLike many native Kansans, I am an eternal optimist, so let me end my formal remarks on a hopeful note. While the road ahead is highly uncertain, and we don't yet know when the economy will return to its previous strength, America will recover from this crisis, as it has from all of our past challenges. Our economic fundamentals are strong, and we have the solid foundation of the entrepreneurial spirit and resiliency of the American people. For its part, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor progress and respond promptly and flexibly to support the recovery. We will closely watch economic and financial conditions, and we will use our monetary policy tools to respond as appropriate to pursue our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. We will also remain open to further adjustments to supervisory schedules and expectations, as needed. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I look forward to our discussion. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019 - May 2020(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2020).Return to text