WASHINGTON, D.C. — The Federal Reserve Board and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau today announced the dollar thresholds in Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) that will apply for determining exempt consumer credit and lease transactions in 2021. These thresholds are set pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) amendments to the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act that require adjusting the thresholds annually based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the Federal Reserve Board and the Bureau will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. Based on the annual percentage increase in the CPI-W as of June 1, 2020, the protections of the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $58,300 or less in 2021. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property (such as mortgages) are subject to the Truth in Lending Act regardless of the amount of the loan. Although the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority under the Truth in Lending Act and the Consumer Leasing Act to the Bureau, the Federal Reserve Board retains authority to issue rules for certain motor vehicle dealers. Therefore, the agencies are issuing these notices jointly. The attached notices will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Truth in Lending (Regulation Z) (PDF)Federal Registernotice: Consumer Leasing (Regulation M) (PDF)
WASHINGTON, D.C. — The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Reserve Board, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that the threshold for exempting loans from special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans during 2021 will remain at $27,200, as it was in 2020. The threshold amount will be effective January 1, 2021, and is based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) as of June 1, 2020. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 amended the Truth in Lending Act to add special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, including a requirement that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the home's interior before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less and also provide that the exemption threshold will be adjusted annually to reflect increases in the CPI-W. If there is no annual percentage increase in the CPI-W, the agencies will not adjust this exemption threshold from the prior year. However, in years following a year in which the exemption threshold was not adjusted, the threshold is calculated by applying the annual percentage change in CPI-W to the dollar amount that would have resulted, after rounding, if the decreases and any subsequent increases in the CPI-W had been taken into account. The attached notice will be published shortly in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Appraisals for Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans Exemption Threshold (PDF)
WASHINGTON—The Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today issued a statement encouraging banks to cease entering into new contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference rate as soon as practicable and in any event by December 31, 2021, in order to facilitate an orderly—and safe and sound— LIBOR transition.
The federal bank regulatory agencies on Friday announced an interim final rule that provides temporary relief for certain community banking organizations related to certain regulations and reporting requirements as a result, in large part, of their growth in size from the coronavirus response. Community banking organizations are subject to different rules and requirements based on their risk profile and asset size. Due to participating in federal coronavirus response programs—such as the Paycheck Protection Program—and other lending that supports the U.S. economy, many community banking organizations have experienced rapid and unexpected increases in their sizes, which are generally expected to be temporary. The temporary increase in size could subject community banking organizations to new regulations or reporting requirements. With regard to the requirements covered by the interim final rule, community banking organizations that have crossed a relevant threshold generally will have until 2022 to either reduce their size, or to prepare for new regulatory and reporting standards. The rule applies to community banking organizations financial institutions with less than $10 billion in total assets as of December 31, 2019. Community banking organizations with under $10 billion in assets may have fewer resources available to prepare and comply with previously unanticipated regulatory requirements, especially during a time of economic disruption. The rule will be effective immediately upon publication in theFederal Register, and comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Temporary Asset Thresholds
Federal financial institution regulatory agencies today issued a joint fact sheet clarifying that bank and credit union compliance efforts to meet Bank Secrecy Act due diligence requirements for customers that are charities and other nonprofit organizations should be based on the money laundering risks posed by the customer relationship. The fact sheet highlights the importance of legitimate charities and nonprofit organizations having access to financial services and being able to transmit funds through legitimate and transparent channels, especially in the context of responding to the coronavirus. It also clarifies that charities and nonprofit organizations as a whole do not present a uniform or unacceptably high risk of being used or exploited for money laundering, terrorist financing, or sanctions violations, and that banks and credit unions must develop risk profiles that are appropriate for the risks presented by each customer. Additionally, it provides examples of customer information that may be useful to banks and credit unions in determining those risk profiles. The fact sheet does not alter existing Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money laundering legal or regulatory requirements or establish new supervisory expectations. It was developed by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Dartmouth College won the 17th annual national College Fed Challenge on Friday, a competition that encourages students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. The team, from Hanover, New Hampshire, represented the Boston Federal Reserve District and included Ayan Agarwal, Utsav Jalen, Kira Koehler, Tench Coxe, and Zach Olson. The team's advisers were Elisabeth Curtis and C. Frank Zarnowski. The College Fed Challenge was held virtually in 2020. Eighty five schools from across the nation submitted video presentations or participated in local virtual competitions starting on October 9, 2020. Eighteen semi-finalist teams participated in question-and-answer sessions held during the week of November 9, and six finalists were selected and their presentations and questions and answers reviewed to determine the winners. The other national finalists were second place: St. Lawrence University, third place: Princeton University, with honorable mentions for Miami University, Michigan State University, and Virginia Commonwealth University. College Fed Challenge is a team competition for undergraduate students. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. "Teams at all levels of the competition demonstrated exceptionally high levels of commitment, determination, and motivation," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell. "I am hopeful that learning about how monetary policy fosters a strong economy might inspire further study and perhaps even future careers in the fields of economics and finance." Teams were evaluated on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. The judges for the final round of the competition were: Antulio Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Board, Monetary Affairs; Ellen Meade, Senior Adviser, Monetary Affairs and Special Adviser to Vice Chair Richard Clarida; Thomas Lubik, Senior Advisor, Economic Research and Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond; and Maggie Sklar, Senior Policy Advisor and Director of International Engagement, Financial Markets Group, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced an extension through March 31, 2021, for several of its lending facilities that were generally scheduled to expire on or around December 31. By backstopping critical short-term funding markets, these facilities are supporting market functioning and enhancing the flow of credit to the economy. The extension, which has also been approved by the Treasury Department, will facilitate planning by potential facility participants and provide certainty that the facilities will continue to be available through the first quarter of 2021 to help the economy recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. The extensions apply to the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. Further details on each facility can be foundhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Commercial Paper Funding Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Primary Dealer Credit Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility Term Sheet (PDF) Updated term sheet:Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Florida First City Banks, Inc., Fort Walton Beach, FloridaWritten Agreement dated February 26, 2010 (PDF)Terminated November 5, 2020 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the approval of fee schedules, effective January 4, 2021, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions (priced services). The Reserve Banks project that they will recover 98.7 percent of their priced services costs in 2021. The Reserve Banks will maintain the current schedule of prices for payment services provided to depository institutions (priced services) in 2021, with the exception of a modification to the Check Services participation fee. While the Reserve Banks do not expect to recover fully actual and imputed expenses, including profit that would have been earned if a private-sector firm provided the services, in 2021, they do expect to recover fully expenses over the long run. This approach recognizes the uncertainties created by the COVID-19 pandemic and offers price stability for customers facing unique challenges in 2021. The Reserve Banks estimate that the change to the Check Service participation fee will result in a 2.7 percent average price increase for Check Services customers. Fees will remain unchanged for the Reserve Banks' FedACH®Service, National Settlement Service, Fedwire®Funds Service, Fedwire®Securities Service, and FedLine®Solutions. The 2021 fee schedule for each of the priced services is available on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial services website at FRBservices.orgSM. The Board also approved the 2021 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $16.4 million for Reserve Bank priced services. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and profit that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires that the Federal Reserve establish fees to recover the costs of providing priced services, including imputed costs, over the long run, to promote competition between the Reserve Banks and private-sector service providers. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Federal Reserve Bank Services: Notification of the 2021 Private Sector Adjustment Factor and 2021 Fee schedules of Federal Reserve Priced Services and Electronic Access (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Craco, Inc., Vinita, OklahomaWritten Agreement dated November 13, 2020 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Farmers Bank & Trust Company, Blytheville, ArkansasFlood insurance violations civil money penalty, dated November 6, 2020 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued a final rule modifying the annual assessment fees for its supervision and regulation of large financial companies, as required by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA). The final rule is nearly identical to the proposal issued in November 2019. The final rule raises the threshold at which fees are assessed for bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies from $50 billion to $100 billion in total consolidated assets. Additionally, it adjusts the amount charged to certain bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies following changes from the Board related to the EGRRCPA. The final rule will be effective 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Supervision and Regulation Assessments of Fees for Bank Holding Companies and Savings and Loan Holding Companies with Total Consolidated Assets of $100 Billion or More (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between September 18, 2020, and October 2, 2020, and includes responses from banks that held approximately three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The September 2020 survey is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday welcomed and supported the release of a proposal and supervisory statements that would enable a clear end date for U.S. Dollar (USD) LIBOR and would promote the safety and soundness of the financial system. The announcements today by regulators in the United States and United Kingdom and by the benchmark administrator for LIBOR together lay out a path forward in which banks should stop writing new USD LIBOR contracts by the end of 2021, while most legacy contracts will be able to mature before LIBOR stops. "Today's plan ensures that the transition away from LIBOR will be orderly and fair for everyone—market participants, businesses, and consumers," said Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles. Under the proposal from LIBOR's administrator, ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (IBA) will consult in early December on its intention to cease the publication of the one week and two month USD LIBOR settings immediately following the LIBOR publication on December 31, 2021, and the remaining USD LIBOR settings immediately following the LIBOR publication on June 30, 2023. LIBOR's regulator, the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), also issued astatementwelcoming these developments. The FCA indicated it will, in coordination with US authorities and relevant authorities in other jurisdictions, consider whether and, if so, how to most appropriately limit new use of USD LIBOR by supervised entities in the UK, consistent with the FCA's objectives of protecting consumers and market integrity. Concurrently, the Federal Reserve Board, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation released astatementexplaining that the June 30, 2023 cessation date for which IBA is consulting would allow time for "legacy contracts"—USD LIBOR transactions executed before January 1, 2022—to mature. The guidance further notes that entering into new USD-LIBOR-based contracts creates safety and soundness risks. Given that, the banking agencies encourage banks to stop entering into those new contracts by end-2021. "These announcements represent critical steps in the effort to facilitate an orderly wind-down of USD LIBOR," said John Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in his capacity as Co-Chair of the Financial Stability Board's Official Sector Steering Group. "They propose a clear picture of the future, to help support transition planning over the next year and beyond." For the purposes of language adopted by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, this statement should not be read as announcing that the LIBOR benchmark has ceased, or will cease, to be provided permanently or indefinitely or that it is not, or no longer will be, representative. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published the latest version of its supervision and regulation report, which summarizes banking conditions and information about the Federal Reserve's bank regulatory and supervisory activities. The current edition includes detailed information on the strength of the banking system in light of the economic and financial stresses from the COVID-19 containment measures. Additionally, it describes current areas of supervisory focus from the Federal Reserve as well as how banks and bank supervisors have adapted to a largely remote working environment. Also on Friday, the Federal Reserve announced that it is updating the list of firms supervised by its Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) Program, which was established in 2010 to supervise the largest and most complex firms. In connection with this update, the Federal Reserve has clarified that so-called "Category 1" firms will be supervised in the LISCC portfolio and that it will accept input on the update. The definition will align the Board's supervisory framework with the new regulatory framework that took effect earlier this year. As a result, certain foreign banks with U.S. operations that have substantially decreased in size and risk over the past decade will move to the Large and Foreign Banking Organization supervision portfolio, where they will be supervised with other banks of similar size and risk. The portfolio move will have no effect on the regulatory capital or liquidity requirements of any firm. The Board will accept input until December 7, 2020. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Report Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) Draft SR letter (PDF) LISCC Program input form
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 4-5, 2020. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 4-5, 2020:HTML|PDF
Governor Lael Brainard At the National Congress of American Indians 77th Annual Convention & Marketplace (via webcast) Good afternoon and thank you to President Fawn Sharp and Kevin Allis of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) for inviting me to join your discussion.1As the oldest and largest American Indian and Alaska Native organization serving the broad interests of tribal governments and communities, your voice is vitally important on economic issues affecting Indian Country.2We appreciate your engagement on our work to reform the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations to better address credit and investment needs in Indian Country. Two years ago, I had the pleasure of visiting with the Thunder Valley Community Development Corporation on the Pine Ridge Reservation of South Dakota. We toured the major housing, small business, and community development mixed-use project, which was under construction. Despite the importance of the Thunder Valley project to the community, banks were not among the funders listed for this important project. Their absence underscores the broader challenge underserved communities such as the Pine Ridge Reservation face when they are included in only one bank's CRA assessment area. I thought about this challenge frequently as we worked on the Board's proposal to reform CRA. We recognize the importance of engaging with Indian Country to inform research and policymaking at the Federal Reserve. The Center for Indian Country Development (CICD) at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is a key resource across the Federal Reserve System in fulfilling our responsibility to Indian Country.3The CICD is led by Casey Lozar, who is an enrolled member of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, and the CICD's Native staff have deep expertise in community and economic development in Indian Country. I greatly value the research and thought leadership of the CICD, as well as their input on policy decisions regarding Indian Country and work to deepen our engagement with tribal communities. The COVID-19 PandemicThe COVID-19 pandemic is bringing hardship to all our communities, and the health of tribal communities is suffering disproportionately. Hospitalization rates for Native Americans are 4.3 times the rate for Whites, adjusting for age, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.4We are thinking about those in Indian Country who have lost loved ones and those who are struggling with the virus. The COVID-19 pandemic is also causing significant economic hardship in Indian Country, affecting the many small businesses that are the backbone of tribal economies.5Indian Country faces significant challenges associated with "various data collection and reporting issues, such as small sample size or large margins of error," which are sometimes referred to by the termAsterisk Nation.6This lack of data makes it challenging to evaluate how economic developments are impacting Indian Country. To assess the real-time economic impacts of COVID-19 on Indian Country's economic experience in the COVID-19 conversation, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis conducted a series of pulse surveys with tribal governments, tribally owned enterprises, and tribal member businesses, as well as hosted meetings with tribal leaders and national organizations.7The surveys found that two-thirds of businesses in Indian Country saw a revenue reduction of at least 20 percent, and one in six businesses reported losing all of their revenue due to the pandemic.8Tribal governments have experienced similar revenue declines, with over half of tribal government respondents anticipating continued declines of more than 20 percent over the next six months. Despite this, over 60 percent of tribal small businesses reported they had not laid off or furloughed workers.9Maintaining these employee/employer relationships will be critical for Indian Country economic recovery, but cash-strapped small businesses are finding it increasingly challenging to maintain payrolls as the pandemic continues. Only 20 percent of tribal small businesses reported they had enough cash on hand to maintain operations beyond a three-month period.10 Emergency lending programs aimed at providing pandemic relief, such as the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) and our Main Street Lending Program, provide critical support to small businesses, so it was extremely important to make sure they were accessible to tribal enterprises. Valuable feedback from tribal leaders and lending institutions led us to change requirements in the Main Street program to allow tribally owned enterprises to participate in Main Street lending while still continuing to provide distributions back to their tribal governments. Similarly, we expanded the PPP Liquidity Facility to include non-depository community development financial institutions (CDFIs) because of their ability to reach minority small business owners, including those in Indian Country. Financial AccessThe COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated an already challenging landscape for financial access in Indian Country, where Native minority depository institutions (MDIs), credit unions, and CDFIs are making exceptional efforts to serve Native Americans on and off tribal lands.11In 2018, the Board worked with the CICD to convene Native American financial institutions on the Flathead Indian Reservation in Montana and discuss how best to collaborate to maximize the impact for their communities. We remain committed to helping these vital financial institutions provide critical financial services in their communities. Despite the significant efforts of Native banks, CDFIs, and credit unions, for many Native Americans, banking and credit access remain challenging. Over 16 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives were unbanked in 2019, and survey research finds that only one in three Native American respondents have a strong or very strong relationship with lenders.12One reason for these low levels of banking relationships is a lack of proximate bank branches. Majority-Native American counties, on average, have only 3 bank branches, which is below the 9-branch average in nonmetro counties, and well below the 26-branch overall average for all counties.13This is exacerbated by low rates of broadband and cellular access in Indian Country, where it is reported that 28 percent of tribal lands and 48 percent of rural tribal lands are not covered by broadband.14 Native small businesses struggle to access bank capital even during normal economic times. Native-owned small businesses also struggle to access CRA-motivated loans. From 2014 to 2018, the total dollar amount of CRA small business and small farm lending per capita in majority-Native American or Alaska Native census tracts was less than half of what it was in majority-non-Hispanic White areas.15These data make it clear that we still have a long way to go in improving access to banking services and capital in Indian Country. CRA ReformLet me spend a few minutes talking about how CRA reform might help address these systemic economic inequities in Indian Country. Over 45 percent of the American Indian and Alaskan Native population live in low- and moderate-income (LMI) or distressed or underserved census tracts.16Yet, feedback from stakeholders like yourselves indicates that many of these locations fall outside of where banks currently serve. In September, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on the CRA. The ANPR proposes reforming CRA regulations based on ideas advanced by a broad set of stakeholders, including the NCAI. I hope you will continue to engage throughout the rest of this process. It has been 25 years since the banking agencies last substantially reformed CRA, so it is important that we get it done right. The Board's ANPR seeks to advance the law's core purpose of addressing unequal access to credit for LMI and minority communities and disinvestment in underserved communities. A modernized CRA should improve credit access and the availability of community development financing. This includes strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of banking needs are being met. Another key objective the Federal Reserve has focused on in the ANPR is providing greater certainty, tailoring regulations based on bank size and business model and local conditions, and minimizing burden. For example, the ANPR proposes using a complementary set of metrics to separately evaluate retail-lending activity (like mortgage lending) and community development financing activity (like investing in affordable rental housing). Looking at these activities separately helps to ensure that we are comprehensively evaluating bank activity and that we are taking both retail and community development activity into consideration. Third, we also hope the ANPR will provide a foundation for a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholders' views and providing a long public comment period, we believe the ANPR provides the basis for the agencies to establish a consistent approach that has broad support. As we embark on CRA reform to strengthen the law's core purpose, we have a unique opportunity to design a regulation that better addresses the needs of individuals and communities in Indian Country. There are several proposals in the ANPR that I would like to highlight that advance that goal. First, we have specific proposals in the ANPR that would allow banks to receive credit for eligible CRA activities in Indian Country, even when those activities are outside of a bank's assessment area(s). For instance, the ANPR proposes providing CRA credit for retail lending activity like mortgage lending or small business lending in Indian Country, even when it takes place outside of CRA assessment areas.17For example, under the ANPR's proposals, a mortgage, small business, small farm, or consumer loan made by a bank on the Flathead Indian Reservation in Montana could be qualified as part of that bank's overall rating, even without the loan being within the assessment area of any bank. In addition, the ANPR proposes expanding consideration of CRAcommunity developmentactivities to specificareas of needoutside of a bank's assessment area(s), with Indian Country being one of the proposed designations. As a result, the Board's proposal makes clear that a bank in any part of the country could receive credit for community development activities in Indian Country. Banks could receive credit for investments in affordable rental housing, broadband expansion, or building community and elder centers in rural areas and other areas of persistent economic distress. We hope that this proposal responds to stakeholders' feedback emphasizing the critical importance of community development in banking deserts, and we look forward to feedback on this during the comment period. The Board understands that broadening eligibility of CRA activities in Indian Country beyond assessment areas is only part of what is required to address structural economic inequities. We are particularly mindful of the importance of community voice on community development projects, especially in Indian Country. Given this, the ANPR seeks feedback on how best to incorporate government or tribal planning in qualifying community development consideration for revitalization and stabilization projects. This is critically important to increase banks' certainty that they will receive CRA credit when they make impactful investments that have the support of tribal governments and leaders, and to increase certainty about how these activities qualify for CRA credit. Second, the ANPR proposes to encourage and reward banks for activities that are responsive to community needs, particularly in harder to serve areas. The ANPR proposes the use ofimpact scoresfor community development activities as a way to ensure that performance evaluations adequately reflect the relative importance of loans and investments within communities. Under the proposed approach, examinations would assess the impact of a bank's community development activities, including those in Indian Country. We hope that this approach will encourage banks to extend additional CRA activities to areas with unmet needs, such as in Indian Country. The ANPR also proposes clear steps to ensure that eligible activities taking place outside of assessment areas are adequately reflected in a bank's CRA ratings. Third, the ANPR contains several proposals that better support mission-focused partners, including those working in Indian Country, to address challenges in credit access and wealth building. Although a significant portion of household wealth is held through homeownership for the U.S. overall, buying a home on trust land can be a complicated transaction.18Section 184 Indian Home Loan Guarantee Program loans from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) are designed to help Native Americans purchase homes, but the required application process can require special expertise.19Many Native MDIs have developed the requisite Section 184 expertise and are experienced in working with Native Americans across the country to purchase homes on and off tribal lands. For example, the Chickasaw Community Bank in Oklahoma, which is both an MDI and a CDFI, has a mission of helping Native Americans around the country achieve homeownership and is one of the nation's largest HUD Section 184 lenders.20 The ANPR includes several provisions to support MDIs like Chickasaw Community Bank. Activities with MDIs can receive credit nationwide even when they take place outside of assessment areas, and the ANPR asks for feedback on whether these activities with MDIs should be a potential pathway to an outstanding rating. In an effort to support mutually beneficial partnerships between MDIs, the ANPR also would provide credit for MDIs and women-owned financial institutions investing in other MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions, as well as in their own institutions. We believe these and other ideas to support MDIs can help provide incentives for majority-owned institutions to capitalize and to partner with these institutions, which will ultimately support more equitable financial access to low-income and minority consumers and communities. In addition, the Federal Reserve has consistently heard that bank partnerships with experienced CDFIs can play an important role in helping banks more effectively make Indian Country loans and investments. During the pandemic, Native CDFIs have played an outsized role in supporting tribal businesses and homeowners, providing financial counseling, or extending loan terms for borrowers. For example, Lakota Funds in South Dakota, led by Tawney Brunsch, helped 37 businesses access more than $100,000 in COVID-19 emergency relief funds and provided more than $120,000 in small grants to Native ranchers, businesses, and homeowners.21Despite their valuable work, Native CDFIs face substantial funding gaps.22 To encourage bank partnerships that advance financial inclusion and address unmet credit needs, the ANPR seeks feedback on extending to CDFIs the status that is extended to MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. This approach would effectively give banks CRA consideration for loans, investments, or services in conjunction with a CDFI anywhere in the country. We look forward to feedback on this potential approach, including the role this could play in Indian Country. In short, we recognize the challenges you face are great and we want to ensure CRA reform helps you to improve credit access and financial inclusion in tribal communities. I am hopeful that the changes the Federal Reserve is considering will help spur new partnerships and encourage greater bank investment for tribal communities that have had inequitable access to financial services for too long. We need your input on these proposals and we are ready to listen. Over the next three months, the Federal Reserve System will host CRA ANPR outreach meetings and listening sessions around the country, including in Indian Country. We encourage your feedback as part of these events, in addition to submitting written comments by the deadline of February 16, 2021. We thank you for your engagement thus far and look forward to hearing more from you and your members through the rulemaking process. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts and Matthew Lambert of the Federal Reserve Board and Casey Lozar of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Seehttp://www.ncai.org/about-ncai.Return to text 3. Seehttps://www.minneapolisfed.org/indiancountry.Return to text 4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),COVIDView(Atlanta: CDC, November 5, 2020).Return to text 5.https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2020/indian-country-small-businesses-face-strong-headwinds-in-covid-19-recovery. September 8, 2020. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.Return to text 6. "American Indians and Alaska Natives may be described as the 'Asterisk Nation' because an asterisk, instead of data point, is often used in data displays when reporting racial and ethnic data," according to the NCAI Policy Research Center (2020), "The Asterisk Nation," 2020.Return to text 7. See Donna Feir, Chris James, Casey Lozar, and Ryan Nunn, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds in COVID-19 Recovery," September 8, 2020; Casey Lozar, Donna Feir, and James Robert Columbe, "COVID-19: A Deep Economic Crisis in Indian Country," May 13, 2020; and Casey Lozar, Donna Feir, and James Robert Columbe, "COVID-19 and Indian Country: Early Snapshot Reveals Disproportionate Economic Exposure and Uncertainty," April 10, 2020.Return to text 8. Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds."Return to text 9. Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds."Return to text 10. Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds."Return to text 11. The Minneapolis Federal Reserve's Center for Indian Country Development website has an interactive map of banks and credit unions owned by, and CDFIs primarily serving, American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian individuals and communities athttps://www.minneapolisfed.org/indiancountry/resources/mapping-native-banks.Return to text 12. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), "How America Banks: Household Use of Banking and Financial Services (PDF)," 2019 FDIC Survey (Washington: FDIC, October 2020); and Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds."Return to text 13. Information calculated using Summary of Deposits (SoD) 2020. Note that not all counties, especially some with high Native American populations, do not exist in the SoD dataset.Return to text 14. Federal Communications Commission (FCC),2020 Broadband Deployment Report(PDF)(Washington: FCC, April 24, 2020).Return to text 15. Federal Reserve Board staff analyzed annually reported CRA Small Business and Small Farm loan data submitted by banks at the tract level and combined it with demographic data from the American Community Survey 2018 5-Year Survey.Return to text 16. Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Online Census Data System 2018 and U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey 2014-2018. A tract is designated as distressed if it is a nonmetropolitan middle-income tract that meets one or more of the following triggers: (1) an unemployment rate of at least 1.5 times the national average; (2) a poverty rate of 20 percent or more; or (3) a population loss of 10 percent or more between the previous and most recent decennial census or a net migration loss of 5 percent or more over the five-year period preceding the most recent census. A tract is designated as underserved if it is a nonmetropolitan middle-income tract that meets criteria for population size, density, and dispersion that indicate the area's population is sufficiently small, thin, and distant from a population center that the tract is likely to have difficulty financing the fixed costs of meeting essential community needs. A nonmetropolitan middle-income tract is defined as a tract with median family income of more than 80 percent or less than or equal to 120 percent compared to a statewide nonmetropolitan area median family income.Return to text 17. Under the approach proposed in the ANPR, the qualitative aspects of a bank's performance would include a review of any retail activity conducted in Indian Country, even when outside of a bank's assessment area(s), as long as a bank also satisfies the needs of its own assessment area(s).Return to text 18. Joshua H. Gallin, Raven Molloy, Eric Nielsen, Paul Smith, and Kamila Sommer (2018). "Measuring Aggregate Housing Wealth: New Insights from Machine Learning (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-064 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 26, 2019).Return to text 19. For more on the Section 184 Indian Home Loan Guarantee Program, seehttps://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/ih/homeownership/184.Return to text 20. Seehttps://www.ccb.bank/indian-country/home-loans.Return to text 21. Lakota Funds data and conversations with Lakota Funds leadership.Return to text 22. Michou Kokodoko, "Findings from the 2017 Native CDFI Survey: Industry Opportunities and Limitations," Center for Indian Country Development Working Paper 2017-04, November 28, 2017.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At "Exploring Careers in Economics," Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is a pleasure to be here today to talk about the future of economics with the next generation of economists who will shape it. I hope you will take away from what you hear today that a rigorous grounding in economic analysis can help you succeed in whatever field you choose. I will share a few thoughts on what economics can do for you and what you can do for the field of economics.1 Let me start with what economics can do for you. Just as there are a variety of reasons that people decide to pursue economics, so too there are many career fields where a degree in economics can be a powerful enabler. I have to admit I had some reservations that led me not to major in economics as an undergraduate. That changed during my first job out of college, when I recognized that economics can provide powerful tools to analyze and design programs to improve opportunities and financial security for workers and their families. Economics can give you a powerful framework to explore the questions that matter most to you. Let me give a few examples of some important questions and the economic practitioners who made a big impact in addressing them. So here's one: How can we help protect working women and men and their families from the financial devastation of job loss due to forces beyond their control? Frances Perkins first began thinking about that question as a young White girl in the manufacturing hub of Worcester, Massachusetts in the 1880s. When Frances asked her father why nice people could fall into poverty, he replied that this was a question little girls should not concern themselves with. Fortunately, Frances did not listen to him. In college, Perkins took an economics class where she started exploring the impact of rapid industrialization on the lives of working people. Her professor encouraged students to visit local factories to see firsthand some of the brutal working conditions facing women and children. That early field research sparked Perkins' determination to bring about improved working conditions and established her careful attention to gathering data.2 Perkins went on to become a key author of the New Deal, and served as Labor Secretary for a record 12 years, despite considerable opposition to the appointment of the first woman Cabinet secretary. She persuaded Roosevelt to put in place a system of unemployment insurance and built the Labor Department's capability to compile the necessary employment statistics. She worked hard to secure legislation codifying core labor rights, and she played a key role in designing and implementing Social Security.3 As Perkins was advocating for policies to improve working conditions facing women and children, another young economist was gathering evidence on the lives of Black working people. In her doctoral dissertation, Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander examined the living standards of Black families who were migrating to Philadelphia to meet the demand for labor brought about by World War I.4Alexander would become the first Black American to earn a PhD in economics. She would subsequently become the first woman to receive a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania because of the barriers she encountered in the field of economics. Black workers were fleeing the South, Alexander explained in her dissertation, because of poor wages, segregation, lynching and disenfranchisement, seeking higher wages, better education, "the ballot," and "greater justice" in the North. And what did those Black workers migrating to Philadelphia find? Alexander's path-breaking research showed that one-third of Black families earned less than what she defined and calculated to be a fair standard of living. About one-quarter of the Black families she studied were underfed. Keep in mind Alexander wrote this in 1921, almost 50 years before the U.S. government adopted a formal definition of the poverty level. Alexander decried the systemic discrimination in housing, education, and so much more that held Black people back in Philadelphia. And yet, Alexander was optimistic that Black workers moving North for better paying jobs would eventually attain the education and standard of living of what she called the "Great American Middle Class." Since that time, a college degree has become more important for financial security. That raises the vitally important question of how to make college more affordable for low-income students. It turns out Lois Dickson Rice spent much of her career addressing that question. As the daughter of a janitor and a maid determined to send their five children to college, Rice was inspired by her parents' dedication to education.5Denied an alumni club state scholarship because she was Black, Lois, with the help of her high school teachers, secured a better scholarship directly from Radcliffe.6From there, she went on to a career at the College Board, becoming widely known as the "mother of the Pell grant." Originally called the Basic Educational Opportunity Grant, over almost half a century later, the program Rice designed and her tireless work to make college accessible to all, have helped around 200 million Americans afford a college education.7 Economics can also provide powerful answers to questions such as, "What is the cost of discrimination?" This question was explored extensively by Andrew Brimmer, a child of sharecroppers who earned his PhD in economics at Harvard. Brimmer served with great distinction as the first Black governor of the Federal Reserve Board from 1966 to 1974, where he contributed to decision-making on monetary policy, and went on to publish research on systemic risk in capital markets and the Fed's lender of last resort function.8Brimmer estimated that discrimination cost the U.S. economy 3.8 percent of gross domestic product in 1993.9In case you are wondering about the cost in today's economy, Dana Peterson, who is the chief economist of the Conference Board and served as a research assistant at the Federal Reserve Board, estimated closing racial gaps could add roughly $5 trillion to the economy over the next five years.10 I wanted to share these examples of pathbreaking economic scholar-practitioners who overcame daunting barriers to make important contributions on economic questions that touch the lives of working people all around our country. We createdExploring Careers in Economicsto help you answer the question of whether economics is right for you. Today you will hear from my colleagues about why they chose economics, and you will learn about the many rewarding career opportunities available to you. Through our partnership with Howard University, you will see how students there are working with our economists to take a hands-on approach to research.11I want to thank our colleagues in Federal Reserve Education for cohosting and helping to make this event available to students, educators, and groups across the nation.12 So that should give you a sense of what economics can do for you. What can you do for economics? You can bring your diverse backgrounds and life experiences and unique talents and interesting questions to strengthen the study and practice of economics. Economics is a powerful field that influences public policy and the economic opportunities facing all Americans. We should not be satisfied until the people in our field and those sitting around every economic decisionmaking table represent America in all its strength and diversity. A growing body of research and evidence makes clear that the quality of the economics profession and its contribution to society will be greater when it reflects a broader range of people and perspectives. Research shows that greater diversity results in better outcomes—it broadens the range of ideas and perspectives brought to bear on solving problems, and it brings important insights to the analysis of our economy. As Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Rouse have documented, microeconomic experiments and other research demonstrate the benefits of diversity for group deliberations and decisionmaking. For instance, one well-known experiment found that racially diverse groups of students outperformed other groups in solving problems, and another found similar benefits from gender diversity.13A review of 2.5 million research papers across the sciences found that those written by ethnically diverse research teams received more citations and had a greater impact than papers by authors with the same ethnicity.14 It is notable that when Congress established the Federal Reserve System, it took great care to ensure that there would be a diversity of perspectives around the decisionmaking table with regard to regional representation. That is why we have 12 Reserve Bank Districts represented on the Federal Open Market Committee. But we have not yet lived up to that standard on racial and ethnic diversity. For instance, it was not until 2017, more than 100 years after the creation of the Federal Reserve, that the first African American, Raphael Bostic, was chosen to lead a Reserve Bank. We need to address the stubbornly persistent gap in the awarding of economics degrees.15Among U.S. citizens and permanent residents earning a doctorate in economics from U.S. universities, the representation of those identifying as Black, Hispanic, or Native American was 10 percent in 2018. The share of women overall obtaining a doctorate in economics was slightly above 30 percent in 2018, little changed from 1994. By contrast, Blacks and Hispanics make up 13 percent of medical students and women overall make up just over half of all medical students in the country.16Economics also lags behind law as well as science and engineering in the share of underrepresented minorities and women receiving advanced degrees. But the gap starts at the undergraduate level, as highlighted by Rhonda Sharpe.17From 2011 to 2015, Black women accounted for only 1.5 percent of undergraduate economics degrees, compared with their 6.2 percent share of all undergraduate degrees.18 Diversity and inclusion need to be priorities for every economics department around the country—and for the think tanks, governments, businesses, and many other organizations that train and employ economists. Many of my colleagues in economics and education are working hard to make progress, including by developing programs to support and mentor diverse talent interested in this consequential discipline. We need to make it a national goal to catch up to medicine, science, engineering, and other fields in developing robust programs, conducting ongoing evaluation, and constantly adapting to improve the inclusivity of economics and our ability to recruit and retain diverse talent. We want to be known within the profession as a place where minorities and women are confident they have the opportunity to make an impact and feel they are respected and heard by leadership. We must continue to make progress towards a more just society, and I am hopeful that economists will contribute to that progress. Studying economics will provide you with a powerful, intellectual framework for asking and answering questions that matter to you. It will enable you to influence people's lives for the better. It will enable you to craft policy to change our world. It will enable you to teach and help shape the next generation. It will enable you to pursue a range of opportunities, not just in economics, but also in business, finance, policy, and nonprofits. I wish you good luck and success in your studies, and I trust that I will soon be reading about the questions—and answers—that matter most to you. 1. I want to thank Darren Gersh, Kurt Lewis, and Nancy Riley for their assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. George Martin,Madam Secretary: Frances Perkins(Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1976). See alsohttps://francesperkinscenter.org/life-new/.Return to text 3. Martin,Madam Secretary: Frances Perkins.Return to text 4. Sadie Tanner Mossell, "The Standard of Living Among One Hundred Negro Migrant Families in Philadelphia,"The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science98 (November 1921): 173-218.Return to text 5. Sam Roberts, "Lois Dickson Rice, Trailblazing Executive Behind Pell Grants, Dies at 83,"The New York Times, January 18, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/us/lois-dickson-rice-dead-pell-grants.html.Return to text 6. Susan Rice,Tough Love: My Story of the Things Worth Fighting For(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2019).Return to text 7. Lois Fitt Rice and David Mundel, "The Impact of Increases in Pell Grant Awards on College-going among Lower Income Youth," (Washington: The Brookings Institution, November 2008). See alsohttps://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R45418.pdfandhttps://blog.ed.gov/2012/06/celebrating-success-40-years-of-pell-grants/.Return to text 8. Andrew F. Brimmer (1984), "The Federal Reserve as Lender of Last Resort: The Containment of Systemic Risk," a paper presented before a joint session of the American Economic Association and the Eastern Economic Association, Dallas, Tex., December 19, pp. 35–40; and Andrew Brimmer (1989), "Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government: Central Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets."Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 3, number 2, pp 3-16.Return to text 9. Thomas D Boston,A Different Vision: African American Economic Thought, Volume 1(Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 1997).Return to text 10. Dana M. Peterson and Catherine L. Mann, "Closing the Racial Inequality Gaps,"Citi Global Perspectives & Solutions, September 2020, https://www.citivelocity.com/citigps/closing-the-racial-inequality-gaps/.Return to text 11. For more on the Board's partnership with Howard University Department of Economics see:https://newsroom.howard.edu/newsroom/article/13256/howard-university-host-five-year-program-increase-diversity-economist-pipelineReturn to text 12. Federal Reserve Education (FRE) offers free classroom ready online resources for students from kindergarten to college. Seehttps://www.federalreserveeducation.org/.Return to text 13. Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse, "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,"Journal of Economic Perspectives30 (Fall 2016): 221-42.Return to text 14. Richard B. Freeman and Wei Huang, "Collaborating with People Like Me: Ethnic Coauthorship within the United States."Journal of Labor Economics, 33(S1), pp 289-318.Return to text 15. Lael Brainard, "Strengthening Diversity in Economics" (speech at the Conference for the 2017 Summer Training and Scholarship Program, East Lansing, MI, July 28, 2017).Return to text 16. Seehttps://www.aamc.org/news-insights/press-releases/majority-us-medical-students-are-women-new-data-show.Return to text 17. Rhonda Vonshay Sharpe, "We've to Build the Pipeline. What's the Problem? What's Next? The Remix,"The Review of Black Political Economy, January 15, 2019.Return to text 18. Amanda Bayer and David Wilcox, "The Unequal Distribution of Economic Education: A Report on the Race, Ethnicity, and Gender of Economics Majors at U.S. Colleges and Universities (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-105 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October, 2017).Return to text Video of Governor Brainard's speech Exploring Careers in Economics - Fall 2020
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on November 12, 2020. Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the Federal Reserve's supervisory activities in the context of the ongoing pandemic. My last appearance, in May, followed a period of historic financial stress.1The emergence of COVID-19, and the measures taken in response (together, the "COVID event"), added a deep strain of uncertainty to financial markets. It prompted a sharp and global flight from riskier, more volatile asset classes, and a retreat to the safety of cash. That retreat demanded immediate, extraordinary, and concerted public intervention, to ensure stability, restore calm, and see the nation through an unfolding crisis. For the Federal Reserve, that intervention spanned a wide range of financial intermediaries and markets, including the banking sector.2Strengthened by a decade of improvements in capital, liquidity, and risk management, including the refinement and recalibration of the last three years, banking organizations became an important shelter from financial distress. Our goal was to ensure this shelter stood fast—that banks could respond to the emergency, and address consumer, business, and community needs, without jeopardizing their own safety and soundness. Thereportaccompanying my testimony lists these actions in detail, and we have extended several of them as the COVID event has continued.3They range from temporary adjustments to capital and reserve measures, to temporary changes in compliance requirements, to temporary shifts toward off-site examination activities, to temporary delays in the implementation of new standards. They include specific guidance on the use of capital and liquidity buffers. They clarify, beyond doubt, that safety and soundness are no impediment to working constructively with customers, including borrowers, in a time of strain. Together with monetary, financial stability, and fiscal actions, these measures helped calm the waters. The initial wave of market stress has passed, and the recovery has begun much sooner than expected. This speaks to the country's tenacity, ingenuity, and spirit in responding to even the greatest of shocks. The challenge we face now is distinct, formidable, and complex. The surprise of the COVID event is gone, replaced by a clearer view of its economic consequences. The burdens facing households and businesses are better understood, but they are no less significant, and they are not evenly borne. I am confident that we will work through them together, support those hardest hit, and ensure that our economic wounds do not become scars. The Federal Reserve remains committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy for as long as needed, and a strong, resilient banking system is an essential element of such support. A durable recovery demands banks that lend actively, confront gains and losses honestly, withstand unexpected shocks, and help customers rebuild and adapt to the new landscape. Our task, as supervisors, is to ensure the country's banks continue to meet that exacting standard. The Federal Reserve's earliest COVID-related guidance, encouraging banks to work constructively with borrowers, was an important step toward this goal. Since then, working with our colleagues in other financial regulatory agencies, we have taken several others: We also used the flexibility in our stress-testing apparatus to better understand the effects of the COVID-event shock.8This framework, like the data associated with it, has long been a key part of day-to-day banking supervision. However, it was born in and built for a crisis, to cut through panic, clarify the health of the largest financial firms, and provide the certainty needed to restore confidence.9In that spirit, and under the constraints of a fast-moving market event, we conducted and published a "sensitivity analysis," examining how institutions would fare in a prolonged downturn. The banking system remained well capitalized in the downside scenarios we examined. But in light of continuing uncertainty, we took several steps to preserve bank capital—and with it, banks' role as a source of economic strength.10We are conducting a second round of stress tests toward that same goal, with results announced before the end of this year. As our report shows, that strength is still intact. Liquidity and capital remain high and, indeed, have increased at our largest banks over the course of the COVID event. Firms have sharply increased their reserves, setting aside resources today against losses they may incur tomorrow. Banks are well positioned to serve as a bulwark against broader financial and economic stress. It is worth recognizing how things might have been different. This foundation would not exist, after a once-in-a-century shock, if not for a decade of work by officials and the banks themselves to make banks stronger and more stable, and to make banking supervision fairer, more efficient, and more transparent. Those values are not contingent, fit only for an economic boom. They represent an ethic and a commitment—to addressing the most pressing supervisory and regulatory issues in the most effective ways—that are even more critical during a crisis. That ethic has steered the Federal Reserve through the last seven months, and it will continue to guide us through the recovery. It applies to our efforts to complete the implementation of Basel III reforms like the net stable funding ratio, tailoring them to the activities and risks of different institutions. It applies to our recent work to streamline the Volcker rule and swap margin rule.11It applies to our assessment of the lessons of the COVID-event shock, understanding which parts of our regulatory framework functioned well and which need improvement.12It applies to our international engagement, to ensure that global financial rules do not splinter and fragment as we gradually return to normal.13 COVID-19 changed many aspects of the Federal Reserve's work. It also affirmed the values and priorities that remain the same—those that will continue to guide us in our support for the financial system, the economy, and the country, long after the COVID event has passed. Thank you for your time. I look forward to answering your questions. 1. Randal K. Quarles, "Supervision and Regulation Report" (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., May 12, 2020).Return to text 2. I have recently spoken on the broader strains in the financial system and the significant efforts made to address them. See Randal K. Quarles, "What Happened? What Have We Learned From It? Lessons from COVID-19 Stress on the Financial System" (speech at the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), October 15, 2020). My remarks today principally describe interventions focused on the banking sector.Return to text 3. For a full list of such actions, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervision and Regulation Report (PDF)," November 2020.Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, SR 20-18 / CA 20-13: "Joint Statement on Additional Loan Accommodations Related to COVID-19."Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Credit Union Administration, and State Financial Regulators, "Interagency Examiner Guidance for Assessing Safety and Soundness Considering the Effect of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Institutions (PDF)," June 2020.Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Consideration for Activities in Response to the Coronavirus Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) (PDF)," May 27, 2020.Return to text 7. Deliberate outreach to community development financial institutions (CDFIs) and minority depository institutions (MDIs) has been a key aspect of these efforts. SeeLael Brainard, "Modernizing and Strengthening CRA Regulations: A Conversation with Minority Depository Institutions" (speech at the National Bankers Association (via webcast), October 15, 2020) (noting preliminary data showing CDFIs, MDIs, and other community banks as source of 73 percent of all Paycheck Protection Program loans to minority-owned businesses); see also Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board updates frequently asked questions to clarify the Board and Department of Treasury's expectations regarding lender underwriting for the Main Street Lending Program," news release, September 18, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces extension of rule change to bolster effectiveness of the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program," news release, July 15, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces expansion of counterparties in the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, and Commercial Paper Funding Facility," news release, July 23, 2020; see also, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces temporary change to its supplementary leverage ratio rule to ease strains in the Treasury market resulting from the coronavirus and increase banking organizations' ability to provide credit to households and businesses," news release, April 1, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies announce changes to the community bank leverage ratio," news release, April 6, 2020.Return to text 8. Randal K. Quarles, "The Adaptability of Stress Testing" (speech at Women in Housing and Finance, Washington, D.C., June 19, 2020).Return to text 9. Randal K. Quarles, "Stress Testing: A Decade of Continuity and Change" (speech at "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, July 9, 2019).Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board releases results of stress tests for 2020 and additional sensitivity analyses conducted in light of the coronavirus event," news release, June 25, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces it will extend for an additional quarter several measures to ensure that large banks maintain a high level of capital resilience," news release, September 30, 2020.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission, "Financial regulators modify Volcker rule," news release, June 25, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Farm Credit Administration, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies finalize amendments to swap margin rule," news release, June 25, 2020.Return to text 12. See Quarles, note 2.Return to text 13. Randal K. Quarles, "Global in Life and Orderly in Death: Post-Crisis Reforms and the Too-Big-to-Fail Question" (speech at the Exchequer Club, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), July 7, 2020).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the “Financial Stability: Stress, Contagion, and Transmission” 2020 Financial Stability Conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Cleveland, Ohio (via webcast) Good afternoon, everyone. It is a pleasure to join you here today and to share a few of my thoughts on financial stability issues with you. I would like to thank the Cleveland Fed and the Office of Financial Research for hosting this conference and for that very kind introduction. It is encouraging to see so many great minds devoting their time and attention to studying financial stability. At the Board, we dedicate considerable attention to this topic as well, and I would like to thank my colleagues, Vice Chair for Supervision Randy Quarles, Chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and Governor Lael Brainard, for their leadership on these issues both internationally and at the Board. It seems especially relevant to look closely at financial stability at this time, as the COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact on the U.S. economy and has tested the resilience of our financial system over the past nine months. Efforts to contain the virus triggered an economic downturn that was unprecedented in both its speed and its severity. Early on, more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April, and though a significant number of people have returned to work since that time, we still face a shortfall in employment relative to its level before the onset of the pandemic. Fortunately, both our economy and our financial system were very strong when the pandemic hit. Most banks began 2020 with higher capital ratios and more liquid assets than they had in previous downturns, which helped them remain a source of strength in March and April. As the crisis intensified in March, serious cracks emerged in several areas of financial intermediation crucial to the health of the economy, including Treasury markets, corporate and municipal bond markets, money market mutual funds, mortgage real estate investment trusts, and residential mortgage markets. Today I am going to focus on the strains in mortgage markets. To address strains in mortgage finance, the Federal Reserve took prompt action to purchase large quantities of agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS), because as we learned during the previous financial crisis, the proper functioning of mortgage markets is necessary for monetary policy to support the economy. Unfortunately, the problems in mortgage finance in this crisis were broader than just the MBS markets. This crisis period has also revealed a number of new—or, in some cases, renewed—vulnerabilities related to lending and loan servicing by nonbank mortgage companies, which I will refer to from here on as mortgage companies. These vulnerabilities were not entirely a surprise to me. When I served as a banker and, subsequently, as the state bank commissioner in Kansas, I saw firsthand the increasing share of mortgage companies in mortgage origination and servicing as well as some of the weaknesses in the mortgage company business model. And in my role as a Board member with a focus on community banks, I frequently hear about the issues that have caused some regional and community bankers to pull back from originating and servicing mortgages. I view this as a significant problem, because I believe firmly that a healthy financial system must have a place for institutions of many different types and sizes that are able to serve the varying needs of different customers. I will begin today by describing the evolving role of mortgage companies in mortgage markets and the risks to financial stability that activity entails. I will then focus on developments in mortgage markets during the COVID-19 pandemic and discuss how actions by the Federal Reserve and the other parts of the government helped stabilize financial markets and prevent more severe damage to the economy. Finally, I will explain how vulnerabilities associated with mortgage companies could pose risks in the future, and I will review ongoing work across the regulatory agencies to monitor and address these vulnerabilities. I will end by enlisting your help. Figuring out how to achieve a balanced mortgage system—one that delivers the best outcomes for consumers while being sufficiently resilient—is a highly complex task that could benefit from the insights of those of you here today. The Role of Nonbank Financial Institutions in Mortgage MarketsIn the 1980s and 1990s, the share of mortgages originated by mortgage companies increased considerably, as expanded securitization of mortgages allowed mortgage companies, which lack the balance sheet capacity of banks, to compete with banks in the mortgage market. The role of mortgage companies increased further in the 2000s with the growth of the private-label mortgage market, where MBS sponsors are private firms without government support. But the last financial crisis and the prolonged housing slump that followed led to a sharp contraction in mortgage company activity. In 2006, mortgage companies accounted for around 30 percent of originations; by 2008, at the bottom of the housing crisis, this share had fallen to around 20 percent. In the past few years, the market share of mortgage companies has risen sharply, well surpassing their share before the housing crisis. Today these firms originate about half of all mortgages, including more than 70 percent of those securitized through Ginnie Mae and the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.1Nonbanks also service roughly three-fourths of mortgages securitized through Ginnie Mae and about one-half of those securitized through the GSEs.2Although some mortgage companies specialize in origination or servicing, most large firms engage in both activities. The expanding presence of mortgage companies has brought benefits to consumers and the economy. Among the benefits are increased competition and technological innovation. Mortgage companies are generally able to react more nimbly to changes in market conditions and have been faster to deploy new technologies such as online mortgage origination platforms. But the rising market share of mortgage companies has also brought with it increased risks. I will focus here on the risks most relevant to financial stability. One major vulnerability of mortgage companies is liquidity—that is, their ability to finance their portfolios of assets.3Unlike banks, mortgage companies typically do not have access to liquidity from the Federal Home Loan Banks or the Federal Reserve System. Mortgage companies also do not have access to deposits as a stable funding source. So while banks will hold some originations on their balance sheets, mortgage companies first fund their originations on warehouse lines of credit that are usually supplied by banks. Typically, after a couple of weeks, the mortgage company repays the warehouse line and securitizes the mortgages. During the last financial crisis, when the private-label mortgage securitization market started to freeze, mortgage lenders could not transition their originations from the warehouse lines to securitization. Warehouse lenders became concerned about their exposures to the nonbank companies and cut off their access to credit. As a result of this funding crunch and other factors, many lenders failed, including household names like New Century Financial Corporation. The risk of events like this one repeating is probably more limited today because mortgage companies primarily originate mortgages that are securitized through the far more stable GSE or Ginnie Mae markets. Instead, the main liquidity concern today comes from mortgage servicing. If borrowers do not make their mortgage payments, mortgage servicers are required to advance payments on the borrowers' behalf to investors, tax authorities, and insurers. Although servicers are ultimately repaid most of these advances, they need to finance them in the interim. The servicers' exposure is greatest for loans securitized through Ginnie Mae, as they require servicers to advance payments for a longer period than the GSEs. In some cases, servicers may also have to bear large credit losses or pay significant costs out of pocket. Because mortgage companies are now the major servicers for Ginnie Mae, this liquidity risk—and possibly solvency risk—is a significant vulnerability for these firms if borrowers stop making their payments. If these firms collapse, what are the repercussions? Clearly, there is considerable potential for harm to consumers, and that harm would likely be concentrated in communities that are traditionally underserved. In recent years, mortgage companies originated the majority of the mortgages obtained by Black and Hispanic borrowers as well as the majority of mortgages to borrowers living in low- or moderate-income areas. What does this have to do with financial stability? One aspect of financial stability is the amplification of shocks—in other words, how a problem initially confined to one part of the financial system can spread to involve broader swaths of borrowers and investors. During the housing crisis, the fragility of mortgage companies was an important source of this kind of amplification. In particular, rising mortgage defaults led to the collapse of many mortgage companies, which in turn was one of the key drivers of a significant pullback in the supply of mortgage credit. That tightening in credit then weighed on house prices, as potential homebuyers, who once would have been able to get a loan, found mortgages expensive or impossible to obtain. As a result, even families who had not been involved in the mortgage frenzy of the mid-2000s found the prices of their homes falling sharply. Today's housing market is much more robust, and the risk of a financial crisis originating from this sector is currently low. Nonetheless, if some large mortgage companies fail and other firms do not step in to take their place, we could see adverse effects on credit availability. Policy Responses to the COVID-19 CrisisAgainst this backdrop, the massive economic shock triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic broadly tested the resilience of our financial system. As the pandemic unfolded, strains occurred across financial markets as investors dashed for cash amid widespread lockdowns and fears about the economic and financial outlook. Mortgage markets, in particular, began to show significant signs of stress. The MBS market, like those for other fixed-income securities, became extremely volatile, and with the unemployment rate spiking, market participants worried that borrowers would be unable to make their mortgage payments. The Federal Reserve's response to the crisis, which was prompt and forceful, included moving the policy interest rate to the effective lower bound, conducting large-scale purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS, and implementing a number of emergency lending facilities to support the continued flow of credit to families, businesses, nonprofits, and state and local governments. On the fiscal policy front, the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) provided economic stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment benefits to individuals as well as eviction moratoriums for renters and a requirement that mortgage servicers grant borrowers up to 12 months of forbearance. All of these policy responses were crucial in easing the stresses in financial markets and helping us weather the period when much of the economy was shuttered. An unfortunate consequence of the mortgage forbearance measure was the pressure it put on the funding needs of servicers, particularly mortgage companies, which are required to continue advancing payments on loans in forbearance. In April, Ginnie Mae alleviated these strains somewhat by announcing a program that provides servicers with financing for principal and interest advances, and which would not be considered a default by the servicer.4Similarly, in April, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) announced that servicers would be required to advance only four months of missed payments for GSE loans.5 Looking Back and Taking StockAlthough we continue to closely monitor the path of the virus and the public response to it, economic and financial conditions have improved much more than many had expected in the spring. It is a great relief that the most dire scenarios that seemed possible in the spring have not come to pass, which is largely due to supportive fiscal and monetary policy. In addition, the near-term stresses in financial markets have abated, providing support for the very strong recovery to date. The Federal Reserve's interest rate actions and MBS purchases have contributed to exceptionally low mortgage rates, which have boosted housing demand and the associated mortgage originations for new home purchases. We are also seeing a surge in mortgage refinancing. As a result, mortgage companies have experienced an influx of cash and an increase in profitability, and they have not had difficulties financing the advance payments. To date, mortgage delinquencies and the take-up on forbearance appear to be limited and well below early fears of significant problems. The increase in employment since April, income support from stimulus payments, programs such as the Paycheck Protection Program that helped small businesses retain workers, and enhanced unemployment insurance all helped borrowers continue making their mortgage payments. And forbearance provisions in the CARES Act to homeowners with mortgages securitized by the GSEs or Ginnie Mae (around 65 percent of outstanding mortgages in the United States) have, so far, helped prevent foreclosures, which also supports home prices. The share of mortgages in forbearance rose above 8 percent last spring, but it has since fallen to below 6 percent. And of those loans in forbearance, about one in six are current in their payments, reflecting the broader economic recovery.6This improvement has not been uniform, though, and the decline in the forbearance rate for loans in Ginnie Mae pools has been slower than those in GSE pools. And, of course, significant uncertainties remain, including the fact that forbearance for federally backed mortgages is set to expire in the first quarter of next year. Some Lessons LearnedEven as we take some comfort in these positive developments, we are also giving due consideration to the financial market vulnerabilities that were made evident in this crisis, and we are examining ways to address them. One prominent vulnerability, which I have described here today, relates to the funding and liquidity profile of mortgage companies. In different circumstances, the large-scale delinquencies and defaults we saw last spring could have caused some mortgage companies to fail, especially if the surge in origination and refinancing income had not materialized. Because many mortgage companies both originate and service mortgages, strains in these firms' servicing books could also weigh on their origination activities. As I noted a moment ago, any reduction in credit availability would be most acute for borrowers from traditionally underserved communities, where mortgage companies have a particularly high market share. Even before the pandemic, regulators had widely recognized that the oversight and regulatory infrastructure for mortgage companies is much less well developed than for banks, and it could benefit from an update. To that end, Ginnie Mae announced new requirements for its servicers last year; the FHFA announced that it will propose updated minimum financial eligibility requirements for the GSE loan sellers and servicers; and, more recently, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors proposed a set of prudential standards for state oversight of nonbank mortgage servicers.7And, finally, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has been working closely with regulatory agencies to analyze risks related to nonbank servicers and to facilitate coordination among agencies.8 An encouraging feature of all of these proposals is that they recognize the complexity of the mortgage company regulatory structure. The states are the primary regulators, but most large mortgage companies operate in multiple states and are also subject to counterparty requirements from the GSEs and Ginnie Mae. These proposals have all moved toward being more consistent with each other, which should reduce regulatory complexity and burden for mortgage companies and regulators. The harder task, however, is thinking about what the overarching regulatory framework should be for mortgage companies. The risks that mortgage companies face are different from those that banks face. Mortgage companies will be more affected by shocks to the mortgage market than banks, which have much more diversified portfolios. As I have mentioned, mortgage companies have less access to liquidity than banks; at the same time, they do not pose the risk of a claim on the deposit insurance fund. These factors suggest that the optimal regulatory framework for mortgage companies should differ from that of banks. These are difficult questions, and a casual observer might wonder if it is really necessary to grapple with them, especially as the industry appears to have successfully weathered the strains of the past few months. But I would argue that this "success" was reliant on rising home prices, low defaults, and massive fiscal and monetary stimulus. But we certainly can't count on all of these factors being present in future periods of economic stress. Around the world, regulators are deliberating about how to address a variety of nonbank entities that can pose systemic risks. In work published last week, the FSB highlighted the need for a macroprudential approach to nonbank financial intermediation.9Members of the FSB are not calling for bank-like regulation for nonbanks, but they recommend a framework of supervision and regulation that takes into account systemic risks that can be posed by nonbanks. I would also note one lesson we learned in March, which is that conditions in financial markets can deteriorate very rapidly and unexpectedly. I'm paying close attention to the issues highlighted in my remarks today, and keeping an open mind. But I think it's clear, that doing the hard thinking and planning now—at a time when conditions afford us the time do so—is a very worthwhile investment. Our financial system and our mortgage market will be more resilient when they welcome and appropriately manage the risks associated with both bank and nonbank mortgage firms. 1. See You Suk Kim, Steven M. Laufer, Karen Pence, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace (2018), "Liquidity Crises in the Mortgage Market (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 347–413; and Laurie Goodman, Alanna McCargo, Jim Parrott, Jun Zhu, Sheryl Pardo, Karan Kaul, Michael Neal, Jung Hyun Choi, Linna Zhu, Sarah Strochak, John Walsh, Caitlin Young, Daniel Pang, Alison Rincon, and Gideon Berger (2020),Housing Finance at a Glance: A Monthly Chartbook, October 2020(PDF)(Washington: Urban Institute, October 27). The expansion of mortgage companies in this market partly reflects a decision by many banks to exit that market to avoid regulatory complexity and the financial, compliance, and reputational costs associated with default servicing and foreclosure.Return to text 2. The data are Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on Recursion Co. (2020), Agency Mortgage Market Monthly Update, November.Return to text 3. See Financial Stability Oversight Council (2019),2019 Annual Report(PDF)(Washington: FSOC, December), p. 42.Return to text 4. See Ginnie Mae (2020), "Ginnie Mae Approves Private Market Servicer Liquidity Facility," press release, April 7.Return to text 5. See Federal Housing Finance Agency (2020), "FHFA Addresses Servicer Liquidity Concerns, Announces Four Month Advance Obligation Limit for Loans in Forbearance," news release, April 21.Return to text 6. The data are from Mortgage Bankers Association (2020), MBA's Weekly Forbearance and Call Volume Survey, November 9.Return to text 7. See Ginnie Mae (2019), "All Participant Memorandum (APM)," webpage (Washington: Ginnie Mae, August 22); Federal Housing Finance Agency (2020), "FHFA to Re-Propose Updated Minimum Financial Eligibility Requirements for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Seller/Servicers," news release (Washington: FHFA, June 15); and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2020), "Comments Requested: Prudential Standards for Non-Bank Mortgage Servicers" (Washington: CSBS, September 29).Return to text 8. See Financial Stability Oversight Council (2020), "Minutes of the Financial Stability Oversight Council: March 26, 2020 (PDF)" (Washington: FSOC).Return to text 9. See Financial Stability Board (2020),Holistic Review of the March Market Turmoil(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November 17).Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the "The Economy and Monetary Policy" event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Vice Chair Clarida delivered substantially similar remarks to an event hosted by the International Monetary Fund on November 24, 2020. On August 27, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) unanimously approved a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that represents a robust evolution of its monetary policy framework.1The new framework has important implications for the way the FOMC going forward will conduct monetary policy in support of its efforts to achieve its dual-mandate goals in a world of low neutral policy rates and persistent global disinflationary pressures. At the September 16 FOMC meeting, the Committee made material changes to its forward guidance for the future path of the federal funds rate to bring the guidance into line with the new policy framework and, in so doing, provided transparent outcome-based guidance linked to the macroeconomic conditions that must prevail before the Committee expects to lift off from the effective lower bound (ELB). In my remarks today, I would like to look ahead and offer my individual perspective on the consequences of our new framework for the conduct of monetary policy over the business cycle, and I also want to provide some context that connects key elements of our new framework to the literature on optimal monetary policy subject to an ELB constraint that binds in economic downturns. Let me say at the outset that when I am not quoting directly from the consensus statement and the September FOMC statement, the views expressed are my own and do not necessarily express the views of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants.2 The plan of my talk is as follows. I will first highlight and discuss the five elements of the new framework that define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time and how, in September, it revised its forward guidance on the federal funds rate to bring the FOMC's policy communications into line with the new framework. I will then provide my perspective on how these key elements of the new framework and the related forward guidance connect to the literature on conducting optimal monetary policy at—and after lifting off from—the ELB. I will next discuss how the Committee's conception of its maximum-employment mandate, a sixth element of the new framework, has evolved since 2012, what this evolution implies for the conduct of monetary policy, and how I plan to factor in this information as I think about the appropriate path for setting the federal funds rate once the conditions for liftoff have been met. I will conclude with a brief recap of my thesis before joining David Wessel, Seth Carpenter, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen in what I am sure will be an engaging virtual conversation. The New Framework and Price StabilityIn my remarks today, I will focus on six key elements of our new framework and the forward guidance provided by our September FOMC statement. Five of these elements define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time, while the sixth pertains to the Committee's conception of its maximum-employment mandate. Of course, the Committee's price-stability and maximum-employment mandates are generally complementary, and, indeed, this complementarity is recognized and respected in the forward-guidance language introduced in the September FOMC statement.3However, for ease of exposition, I will begin by focusing on the five elements of the new framework that define how the Committee will seek to achieve over time its price-stability mandate, before discussing how maximum employment is defined in the new framework and what this definition implies for the conduct and communication of monetary policy under the new framework. Five features of the new framework and September FOMC statement define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time: I believe that a useful way to summarize the framework defined by these five features istemporary price-level targeting (TPLT, at the ELB) that reverts to flexible inflation targeting (once the conditions for liftoff have been reached).Just such a framework has been analyzed by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Bernanke (2020), who in turn build on earlier work by Evans (2012) and Reifschneider and Williams (2000), among others.9Each of the five elements of the new framework highlighted previously is consequential. I now discuss each in turn and provide some context for how I understand them to relate to the monetary economics literature on TPLT. First elementA policy that delays liftoff from the ELB until a threshold for average inflation has been reached is one element of a TPLT strategy. In our September FOMC statement, we communicated that, along with other complementary conditions, inflation must have risen to 2 percent before we expect to lift off from the ELB. This condition refers to inflation on an annual basis. TPLT with such a one-year memory has been studied using stochastic simulations of the Fed's FRB/US model by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019). Second elementAn alternative version of TPLT would commit the central bank to delay liftoff until inflation has averaged 2 percent over a longer period—say, three years (Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) study the case of TPLT with a three-year memory as well as the case of TPLT with a one-year memory) or perhaps an even longer period that commences when the policy rate hits the ELB itself (as in Bernanke's (2017a) original TPLT proposal). In these versions of TPLT, inflation would likely have to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time before the condition for liftoff is met. For example, if TPLT with a three-year memory were chosen and inflation in three consecutive years equaled 1.9 percent, 2 percent, and 2.1 percent, then liftoff would not occur until inflation hit 2.1 percent for one year. Note, however, that TPLT with a longer memorydoes notdefine ex ante the amount by which inflation must exceed 2 percent before liftoff is considered, nor does it specify for how long inflation exceeds 2 percent before liftoff is considered. For example, under TPLT with a three-year memory, if inflation instead equaled 1.8 percent, 2 percent, and 2.2 percent for three consecutive years, then liftoff ex post could not occur until inflation hit 2.2 percent for one year. But if, instead, inflation equaled 1.8 percent, 2.1 percent, and 2.1 percent, then inflation would exceed 2 percent for two years before liftoff were contemplated. In the case of the Federal Reserve, the FOMC chose a one-year memory for the inflation threshold that must be met before liftoff is considered, but it also indicated in September that the Committee expects to delay liftoff until inflation is "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time." What "moderately" and "for some time" mean will depend on the initial conditions at liftoff (just as they do under versions of TPLT with a longer memory). Crucially, the Committee's judgment on the projected duration and magnitude of the deviation from the 2 percent inflation goal will, at the time of liftoff and every three months thereafter, be communicated in the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) for inflation.10The SEP has served this purpose before. For example, in 2018, as the FOMC factored in an unexpected tailwind from a mid-cycle fiscal expansion and chose to maintain a gradual pace of normalization to return the federal funds rate to its projected neutral stance, the median participant at the September 2018 FOMC meeting projected that core PCE inflation would moderately exceed 2 percent for three years. The FOMC statement itself can, in the new regime, also be used as a platform to communicate the Committee's tolerance for deviations of inflation from the 2 percent longer-run goal, and, indeed, it has served this purpose in the past—for example, with the threshold-based guidance linked to inflation outcomes introduced in the FOMC statement in December 2012.11 Third elementIn the TPLT framework studied by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019), policy reverts to an inertial Taylor rule after liftoff, so policy remains accommodative for some time, which depends in their formulation on the degree of policy inertia in the reaction function. Our September FOMC statement also calls for policy to remain accommodative for some time after liftoff. Once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met, the SEP "dot plot" will convey the median participant's projections over a three-year horizon not only for inflation, but also for the pace of liftoff as well as the ultimate destination for the policy rate. I will have more to say shortly about a relevant policy rule benchmark that I believe is consistent with the new framework. Fourth elementThe new framework is asymmetric. That is, as in Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019), the goal of monetary policy after lifting off from the ELB is to return inflation to its 2 percent longer-run goal, but not to push inflation below 2 percent. In other words, after liftoff from the ELB, monetary policy reverts to simple flexible inflation targeting (Bernanke, 2017b). In the Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) study, flexible inflation targeting post-liftoff is implemented with an inertial Taylor rule that satisfies the Taylor principle (that is, the policy responds to the difference between actual inflation and the 2 percent target with a coefficient that exceeds unity). The policy is flexible in that the desired pace of return to 2 percent can reflect considerations other than the 2 percent longer-run goal for inflation that are relevant to the Committee's mandate. In the case of the Federal Reserve, we have highlighted that making sure that inflation expectations remain anchored at our 2 percent objective is just such a consideration. Speaking for myself, I follow closely the Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations (CIE) as a relevant indicator that this goal is being met.12Other things being equal, if at the time of liftoff the CIE index is below its pre-ELB level, then my desired pace of policy normalization post-liftoff to return inflation to 2 percent—as well as the projected pace of return to 2 percent inflation—would be somewhat slower than if the CIE index at the time of liftoff is equal to its pre-ELB level. Another factor I will consider in calibrating the pace of policy normalization post-liftoff is the average rate of PCE inflation since the new framework was adopted in August 2020—a time, as it happened, that the federal funds rate was constrained at the ELB. If average inflation since August 2020 turns out to be notably below 2 percent, then my desired pace of policy normalization post-liftoff—and the implied pace of return to 2 percent inflation—would, other things being equal, be somewhat slower than if average inflation since adoption was close to or equal to 2 percent. It is important to note, however, that the goal of the new framework is to keep inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent, and, for this reason, I myself plan to focus more on indicators of inflation expectations themselves—especially survey-based measures—than I will on the calculation of an average rate of inflation over any particular window of time. Fifth elementOur framework aims ex ante for inflation to average 2 percent over time, but it does not make a (time-inconsistent) commitment to achieve ex post inflation outcomes that average 2 percent under any and all circumstances and constellations of shocks. The same is true for the TPLT regime studied in Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) featuring TPLT with a one-year memory. In this regime, the only way in which average inflation enters the policy rule is through the timing of liftoff itself. Yet in stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model under TPLT with a one-year memory that reverts to flexible inflation targeting after liftoff, inflation does average very close to 2 percent in the stochastic simulations reported in their paper. The model of Mertens and Williams (2019) delivers a similar outcome: Even though the policy reaction function in their model does not incorporate an ex post makeup element, it delivers a long-run (unconditional) average rate of inflation equal to target by aiming for a moderate inflation overshoot away from the ELB that is calibrated to offset the inflation shortfall caused by the ELB. It is important to note that, as our new consensus statement emphasizes, the Federal Reserve is committed to usingallof our available tools—not just the federal funds rate and forward guidance, but also large-scale asset purchases—to achieve our dual-mandate goals. Since our March 2 FOMC meeting, the federal funds rate has been reduced by 150 basis points to its ELB and we have increased our Treasury and mortgage-backed securities holdings by a total of $3.3 trillion; we continue to add to these holdings at a pace of $120 billion per month.* These large-scale asset purchases are providing substantial support to the economic recovery by sustaining smooth market functioning and fostering accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. At our November FOMC meeting, we discussed our asset purchases and the critical role they are playing in supporting the economic recovery. Looking ahead, we will continue to monitor developments and assess how our ongoing asset purchases can best support achieving our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives. In this regard, I note that the simulation results reported in Bernanke (2020) suggest that, in general, a monetary policy at the ELB that combines threshold forward guidance, such as I have discussed in these remarks, withlarge-scale asset purchases, such as we have had in place since March, is best equipped ex ante to achieve inflation outcomes that are consistent with price stability and well-anchored inflation expectations at the 2 percent objective. The New Framework and Maximum EmploymentAn important evolution in our new framework is that the Committee now defines maximum employment as the highest level of employment that does not generate sustained pressures that put the price-stability mandate at risk.13As a practical matter, this definition means to me that, when the unemployment rate is elevated relative to my SEP projection of its long-run level and other indicators—such as the prime-age employment-to-population and labor force participation ratios—are depressed relative to recent business cycle peaks, monetary policy should, as before, continue to be calibrated to eliminate such employment shortfalls as long as doing so does not put the price-stability mandate at risk. Indeed, in our September FOMC statement, we indicated that we expect it will be appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in the current 0 to 25 basis point target range until inflation has reached 2 percent (on an annual basis)andlabor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment. In our new framework, when in a business cycle expansion labor market indicators return to a range that, in the Committee's judgment, is broadly consistent with its maximum-employment mandate, it will be data on inflation itself that policy will react to, but going forward, policy will not tighten solely because the unemployment rate has fallen below any particular econometric estimate of its long-run natural level. This guidance has an important implication for the Taylor-type policy reaction function I will consult. In particular, I will continue—as I have done since joining the Fed—to consult policy rules that respect the Taylor principle as a benchmark for calibrating the pace and destination of policy rate normalization once, after the inflation and employment thresholds have been reached, the process of policy normalization commences. Consistent with our new framework, the relevant policy rule benchmark I will consult after the conditions for liftoff have been met is an inertial Taylor-type rule with a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, a coefficient of 1.5 on the gap between core PCE inflation and the 2 percent longer-run goal, and a neutral real policy rate equal to my SEP projection of long-run r*. As discussed earlier, the degree of inertia in the benchmark rule I consult will depend on initial conditions at the time of liftoff, especially the reading of the staff's CIE index relative to its February 2020 level. Such a reference rule, which becomes relevant once the conditions for policy normalization have been met, is similar to the forward-looking Taylor-type rule for optimal monetary policy derived in Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999). The stability properties of Taylor-type rules in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models have been studied by Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Galí (2008), among others, and they show that for the standard Taylor coefficient of 1.5 on the inflation gap and a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, the rational expectations equilibrium is unique for standard parametrizations. One dimension along which our new framework may appear to differ from the threshold forward-guidance proposals advocated by some others is that our September FOMC guidance explicitly requires that, at the time of liftoff, in addition to inflation reaching 2 percent (on an annual basis), labor market conditions must have also reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, and I offered earlier the metrics on some of the labor market indicators I will follow to make that assessment. However, any difference between our September FOMC guidance and similar threshold guidance policies that depend only on realized inflation is, I believe, more apparent than real. The reason is that proponents of inflation-based threshold guidance typically acknowledge that liftoff following an ELB episode should be conditioned on the judgment that inflation has sustainably reached the target before liftoff is contemplated (Bernanke, 2017b), and such an assessment of sustainability in most circumstances would, I believe, be informed by an assessment of labor market conditions (Reifschneider and Wilcox, 2020). The Committee confronted just this situation in the first half of 2012, when core PCE inflation reached 2 percent at a time when the unemployment rate remained elevated at 8.2 percent, well above the top of the range of FOMC estimates of its longer-run normal level. The Committee at that time wisely, in my judgment, chose not to lift off in 2012, and I would hope—and, under our September rate guidance, expect—a future Committee would reach the same judgment under similar circumstances. Concluding RemarksIn closing, I think of our new flexible average inflation-targeting framework as a combination of TPLT at the ELB with flexible inflation targeting, to which TPLT reverts once the conditions to commence policy normalization articulated in our September 2020 FOMC statement have been met. In this sense, our new framework indeed represents anevolution, not a revolution.The Committee is committed to using all available tools, including threshold-based forward guidance as well as large-scale asset purchases, to achieve the price-stability and maximum-employment goals specified in our new consensus statement. Thank you very much, and I now look forward to my virtual conversation with Annette, David, and Seth. ReferencesAhn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2. Bernanke, Ben S. (2017a). "Monetary Policy in a New Era (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12–13. ——— (2017b). "Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,"Ben Bernanke's Blog,October 12. ——— (2020). "The New Tools of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 110 (April), pp. 943–83. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"AEA Papers and Proceedings,vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26. Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002). "Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 49 (September), pp. 1105–29. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139–233. Evans, Charles L. (2012). "Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent Price-Level Target,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February, S1), pp. 147–55. Galí, Jordi (2008).Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019). Reifschneider, David L., and David Wilcox (2020). "A Program for Strengthening the Federal Reserve's Ability to Fight the Next Recession (PDF)," Working Paper Series 20‑5. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, March. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. 1. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 2. I would like to thank Ellen Meade and Chiara Scotti for their assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 3. The September 2020 FOMC statement says: "The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4). The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 4. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective: "The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate" (paragraph 4). The September 2020 FOMC statement indicates the conditions for liftoff (see note 3).Return to text 5. The September 2020 FOMC statement reads: "With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent" (paragraph 4). A similar sentence appears in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.Return to text 6. The September 2020 FOMC statement reads: "The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved" (paragraph 4).Return to text 7. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective (see note 4).Return to text 8. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy says: "In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4).Return to text 9. See also Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Hebden and López-Salido (2018).Return to text 10. The most recent SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2020 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 11. The guidance from the December 2012 FOMC statement was the following: "To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored" (paragraph 5). The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 12. See Ahn and Fulton (2020) for a discussion of the CIE index.Return to text 13. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates this concept with the following: "The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments" (paragraph 3).Return to text *The speech has been updated to clarify that the Committee began to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate at its March 2 meeting; the change in securities holdings has been updated accordingly.