After careful consideration of the growing public health concerns associated with the coronavirus (COVID-19), the organizing sponsors of the 2020 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference (NICRC), scheduled March 9-12 in Denver, Colorado, have made the decision to postpone the conference. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation jointly made this decision out of an abundance of caution to help safeguard the health and well-being of the more than 1,300 registered conference participants. The NICRC planning team is working to confirm a date to reschedule the conference as soon as possible later this year.
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced two actions to support the U.S. economy and allow banking organizations to continue lending to households and businesses: The "standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk" rule, also known as SA-CCR, was finalized by the agencies in November 2019, with an effective date of April 1. It reflects improvements made to the derivatives market since the 2007-2008 financial crisis, such as central clearing and margin requirements. To help improve current market liquidity and smooth disruptions, the agencies will permit banking organizations to early adopt SA-CCR for the reporting period ending March 31. Additionally, the agencies issued an interim final rule that allows banking organizations to mitigate the effects of the "current expected credit loss," or CECL, accounting standard in their regulatory capital. Banking organizations that are required under U.S. accounting standards to adopt CECL this year can mitigate the estimated cumulative regulatory capital effects for up to two years. This is in addition to the three-year transition period already in place. Alternatively, banking organizations can follow the capital transition rule issued by the banking agencies in February 2019. The changes will be effective immediately and the agencies will accept comments on the CECL interim final rule for 45 days. Federal Registernotice:Standardized Approach for Calculating the Exposure Amount of Derivative Contracts Federal Registernotice:Regulatory Capital Rule: Revised Transition of the Current Expected Credit Losses Methodology for Allowances
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Conference of State Bank Supervisors Federal financial institution regulators and state regulators today encouraged financial institutions to meet the financial needs of customers and members affected by the coronavirus.The agencies recognize the potential impact of the coronavirus on the customers, members, and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. Regulators note that financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers and other customers in affected communities. Prudent efforts that are consistent with safe and sound lending practices should not be subject to examiner criticism. The agencies understand that many financial institutions may face current staffing and other challenges. In cases in which operational challenges persist, regulators will expedite, as appropriate, any request to provide more convenient availability of services in affected communities. The regulators also will work with affected financial institutions in scheduling examinations or inspections to minimize disruption and burden. SR letter 20-4 / CA letter 20-3, "Supervisory Practices Regarding Financial Institutions Affected by Coronavirus"
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board on Friday invited public comment on proposed changes to the guidance for resolution plans submitted by large foreign banks, including plans that are due by July 1, 2021. The updates focus on the agencies' expectations around a firm's derivatives and trading activities and payment, clearing, and settlement activities. Resolution plans, commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The resolution planning process helps ensure that a firm's failure would not have serious adverse effects on the financial stability of the United States. For foreign banking organizations, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. subsidiaries and operations. The proposed guidance is largely similar to the guidance from March 2017, and includes certain updates based on the agencies' review of the firms' most recent resolution plans and changes to the resolution planning rules. The proposed guidance also seeks comment on objective, quantitative criteria to determine its applicability. As of the date of the proposal, the firms that meet the proposed criteria are the U.S. operations of Barclays, Credit Suisse, and Deutsche Bank. Comments on this proposal will be accepted for 60 days. Also on Friday, the Board announced that due to the substantial and sustained decrease in risk from the U.S. operations of UBS AG, it will now be supervised as part of its Large and Foreign Banking Organization supervision portfolio. The Board made this change after a comprehensive determination of the risks from the firm. As an example, the firm has decreased from roughly $375 billion to less than $200 billion in total assets over the past decade, and separate measures of complexity have also declined. As a result of this change, the firm will be supervised alongside other banks of similar risk. This change will have no effect on the regulatory capital or liquidity requirements for the firm or the Board's ability to supervise the activities of the firm. Federal Registernotice: Guidance for Resolution Plan Submissions of Certain Foreign-Based Covered Companies
The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing a coordinated action to enhance the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements. These central banks have agreed to lower the pricing on the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements by 25 basis points, so that the new rate will be the U.S. dollar overnight index swap (OIS) rate plus 25 basis points. To increase the swap lines' effectiveness in providing term liquidity, the foreign central banks with regular U.S. dollar liquidity operations have also agreed to begin offering U.S. dollars weekly in each jurisdiction with an 84-day maturity, in addition to the 1-week maturity operations currently offered. These changes will take effect with the next scheduled operations during the week of March 16.1The new pricing and maturity offerings will remain in place as long as appropriate to support the smooth functioning of U.S. dollar funding markets. The swap lines are available standing facilities and serve as an important liquidity backstop to ease strains in global funding markets, thereby helping to mitigate the effects of such strains on the supply of credit to households and businesses, both domestically and abroad. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. 1. Weekly operations are currently held by the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank.Return to text Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement Federal Reserve actions to support the flow of credit to households and businesses Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank
The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing a coordinated action to further enhance the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements. To improve the swap lines' effectiveness in providing U.S. dollar funding, these central banks have agreed to increase the frequency of 7-day maturity operations from weekly to daily. These daily operations will commence on Monday, March 23, 2020, and will continue at least through the end of April. The central banks also will continue to hold weekly 84-day maturity operations. The swap lines among these central banks are available standing facilities and serve as an important liquidity backstop to ease strains in global funding markets, thereby helping to mitigate the effects of such strains on the supply of credit to households and businesses, both domestically and abroad. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank
Five federal financial regulatory agencies today issued a joint statement encouraging banks, savings associations and credit unions to offer responsible small-dollar loans to consumers and small businesses in response to COVID-19. The statement of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency recognizes that responsible small-dollar loans can play an important role in meeting customers' credit needs because of temporary cash-flow imbalances, unexpected expenses, or income disruptions during periods of economic stress or disaster recoveries. Such loans can be offered through a variety of structures including open-end lines of credit, closed-end installment loans, or appropriately structured single payment loans. The agencies state that loans should be offered in a manner that provides fair treatment of consumers, complies with applicable laws and regulations, and is consistent with safe and sound practices. For borrowers who experience unexpected circumstances and cannot repay a loan as structured, banks, savings associations and credit unions are further encouraged to consider workout strategies designed to help borrowers to repay the principal of the loan while mitigating the need to re-borrow. This statement follows other actions taken by the agencies to encourage financial institutions to meet the financial services needs of their customers and members who have been affected by COVID-19. For example, the federal banking agencies issued a joint statement on March 19 informing institutions that the agencies will favorably consider retail banking and lending activities that meet the needs of affected low- and moderate-income individuals, small businesses, and small farms for Community Reinvestment Act purposes, that are consistent with safe and sound banking practices and applicable laws, including consumer protection laws. In addition to today's statement, the agencies are working on future guidance and lending principles for responsible small-dollar loans to facilitate the ability of banks, credit unions, and saving associations to more effectively meet the ongoing credit needs of their customers, members, and communities.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Conference of State Bank Supervisors Joint Release Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Tennessee Department of Financial Institutions, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of tornadoes in Tennessee on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found atwww.fema.gov. Lending:Financial institutions should work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by tornadoes in Tennessee. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. In supervising institutions affected by tornadoes in Tennessee, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the tornadoes in Tennessee. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by tornadoes in Tennessee. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by tornadoes in Tennessee may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by tornadoes in Tennessee that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the effects of tornadoes in Tennessee. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, institutions should review the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by tornadoes in Tennessee. Institutions should monitor municipal securities and loans affected by tornadoes in Tennessee. Appropriate monitoring and prudent efforts to stabilize such investments are encouraged. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.html FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/Resources/Documents/SL-17-02-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster-enclosure.pdf
To support the flow of credit to households and businesses, the federal bank regulatory agencies today announced an interim final rule to ensure that financial institutions will be able to effectively use a liquidity facility recently launched by the Federal Reserve Board. The Board launched the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or MMLF, yesterday to enhance the liquidity and functioning of money markets and to support the economy. The interim final rule modifies the agencies' capital rules so that financial institutions receive credit for the low risk of their MMLF activities, reflecting the fact that institutions would be taking no credit or market risk in association with such activities. The change only applies to activities with the MMLF. The rule is effective immediately and comments will be accepted for 45 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Capital Rule: Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Board Votes Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility
The federal bank regulatory agencies today released a statement encouraging banks to use the Federal Reserve's "discount window" so that they can continue supporting households and businesses. The discount window provides short-term loans to banks and plays an important role in supporting the liquidity and stability of the banking system. By providing ready access to funding, the discount window helps depository institutions manage their liquidity risks efficiently and avoid actions that have negative consequences for their customers. Thus, the discount window supports the smooth flow of credit to households and businesses. Identical Statement from Federal Reserve Issued on 3/15/20
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced two actions to support the U.S. economy and allow banks to continue lending to households and businesses. They are: The statement notes that banks have more than doubled their capital and liquidity levels over the past decade and are now substantially safer and stronger than they were previously. As a result, the agencies are encouraging banks to use that strength to support households and businesses. The statement is substantially similar to one issued by the Federal Reserve Board earlier this week. The technical change is an interim final rule that, if a bank's capital declines by a certain amount, phases in the agencies' automatic distribution restrictions gradually, as intended. Like the statement, the interim final rule facilitates the use of firms' capital buffers to promote lending activity to households and businesses. Federal Register notice: Regulatory Capital Rule: Eligible Retained Income Board Votes
The Federal Reserve is carefully monitoring credit markets and is prepared to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby promote its maximum employment and price stability goals. In addition toactions taken by the Federal Open Market Committee, includingactions taken in coordination with other central banks, the Federal Reserve Board announced a series of actions in support of these goals. These actions are summarized below. Discount WindowFederal Reserve lending to depository institutions (the "discount window") plays an important role in supporting the liquidity and stability of the banking system and the effective implementation of monetary policy. By providing ready access to funding, the discount window helps depository institutions manage their liquidity risks efficiently and avoid actions that have negative consequences for their customers, such as withdrawing credit during times of market stress. Thus, the discount window supports the smooth flow of credit to households and businesses. Providing liquidity in this way is one of the original purposes of the Federal Reserve System and other central banks around the world. The Federal Reserve encourages depository institutions to turn to the discount window to help meet demands for credit from households and businesses at this time. In support of this goal, the Board today announced that it will lower the primary credit rate by 150 basis points to 0.25 percent, effective March 16, 2020. This reduction in the primary credit rate reflects both the 100 basis point reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate and a 50 basis point narrowing in the primary credit rate relative to the top of the target range. Narrowing the spread of the primary credit rate relative to the general level of overnight interest rates should help encourage more active use of the window by depository institutions to meet unexpected funding needs. To further enhance the role of the discount window as a tool for banks in addressing potential funding pressures, the Board also today announced that depository institutions may borrow from the discount window for periods as long as 90 days, prepayable and renewable by the borrower on a daily basis. The Federal Reserve continues to accept the same broad range of collateral for discount window loans. Intraday CreditThe availability of intraday credit from the Federal Reserve supports the smooth functioning of payment systems and the settlement and clearing of transactions across a range of credit markets. The Federal Reserve encourages depository institutions to utilize intraday credit extended by Reserve Banks, on both a collateralized and uncollateralized basis, to support the provision of liquidity to households and businesses and the general smooth functioning of payment systems. Bank Capital and Liquidity BuffersThe Federal Reserve is encouraging banks to use their capital and liquidity buffers as they lend to households and businesses who are affected by the coronavirus. Since the global financial crisis of 2007-2008, U.S. bank holding companies have built up substantial levels of capital and liquidity in excess of regulatory minimums and buffers. The largest firms have $1.3 trillion in common equity and hold $2.9 trillion in high quality liquid assets. The U.S. banking agencies have also significantly increased capital and liquidity requirements, including improving the quality of regulatory capital, raising minimum capital requirements, establishing capital and liquidity buffers, and implementing annual capital stress tests. These capital and liquidity buffers are designed to support the economy in adverse situations and allow banks to continue to serve households and businesses. The Federal Reserve supports firms that choose to use their capital and liquidity buffers to lend and undertake other supportive actions in a safe and sound manner. Reserve RequirementsFor many years, reserve requirements played a central role in the implementation of monetary policy by creating a stable demand for reserves. In January 2019, the FOMC announced its intention to implement monetary policy in an ample reserves regime. Reserve requirements do not play a significant role in this operating framework. In light of the shift to an ample reserves regime, the Board has reduced reserve requirement ratios to zero percent effective on March 26, the beginning of the next reserve maintenance period. This action eliminates reserve requirements for thousands of depository institutions and will help to support lending to households and businesses. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement Coordinated central bank action to enhance the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday announced the establishment of a temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA Repo Facility) to help support the smooth functioning of financial markets, including the U.S. Treasury market, and thus maintain the supply of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The FIMA Repo Facility will allow FIMA account holders, which consist of central banks and other international monetary authorities with accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to enter into repurchase agreements with the Federal Reserve. In these transactions, FIMA account holders temporarily exchange their U.S. Treasury securities held with the Federal Reserve for U.S. dollars, which can then be made available to institutions in their jurisdictions. This facility should help support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market by providing an alternative temporary source of U.S. dollars other than sales of securities in the open market. It should also serve, along with the U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines the Federal Reserve has established with other central banks, to help ease strains in global U.S. dollar funding markets. The Federal Reserve provides U.S. dollar-denominated banking services to FIMA account holders in support of Federal Reserve objectives and in recognition of the U.S. dollar's predominant role as an international currency. The FIMA Repo Facility, which adds to the range of services the Federal Reserve provides, will be available beginning April 6 and will continue for at least 6 months. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. FIMA Repo Facility FAQs
The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support households, businesses, and the U.S. economy overall in this challenging time. The coronavirus pandemic is causing tremendous hardship across the United States and around the world. Our nation's first priority is to care for those afflicted and to limit the further spread of the virus. While great uncertainty remains, it has become clear that our economy will face severe disruptions. Aggressive efforts must be taken across the public and private sectors to limit the losses to jobs and incomes and to promote a swift recovery once the disruptions abate. The Federal Reserve's role is guided by its mandate from Congress to promote maximum employment and stable prices, along with its responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. In support of these goals, the Federal Reserve is using its full range of authorities to provide powerful support for the flow of credit to American families and businesses. These actions include: In addition to the steps above, the Federal Reserve expects to announce soon the establishment of a Main Street Business Lending Program to support lending to eligible small-and-medium sized businesses, complementing efforts by the SBA. The PMCCF will allow companies access to credit so that they are better able to maintain business operations and capacity during the period of dislocations related to the pandemic. This facility is open to investment grade companies and will provide bridge financing of four years. Borrowers may elect to defer interest and principal payments during the first six months of the loan, extendable at the Federal Reserve's discretion, in order to have additional cash on hand that can be used to pay employees and suppliers. The Federal Reserve will finance a special purpose vehicle (SPV) to make loans from the PMCCF to companies. The Treasury, using the ESF, will make an equity investment in the SPV. The SMCCF will purchase in the secondary market corporate bonds issued by investment grade U.S. companies and U.S.-listed exchange-traded funds whose investment objective is to provide broad exposure to the market for U.S. investment grade corporate bonds. Treasury, using the ESF, will make an equity investment in the SPV established by the Federal Reserve for this facility. Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve will lend on a non-recourse basis to holders of certain AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated consumer and small business loans. The Federal Reserve will lend an amount equal to the market value of the ABS less a haircut and will be secured at all times by the ABS. Treasury, using the ESF, will also make an equity investment in the SPV established by the Federal Reserve for this facility. The TALF, PMCCF and SMCCF are established by the Federal Reserve under the authority of Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary. These actions augment the measures taken by the Federal Reserve over the past week to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. These include: Taken together, these actions will provide support to a wide range of markets and institutions, thereby supporting the flow of credit in the economy. The Federal Reserve will continue to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby promote its maximum employment and price stability goals. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement Term Sheet - Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PDF) Updated term sheet:Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility Term Sheet - Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PDF) Updated term sheet:Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility Term Sheet - Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (PDF) Updated term sheet:Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Term Sheet - Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Term Sheet - Commercial Paper Funding Facility Updated term sheet:Commercial Paper Funding Facility
The Federal Reserve on Thursday announced the establishment of temporary U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap lines) with the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Danmarks Nationalbank (Denmark), the Bank of Korea, the Banco de Mexico, the Norges Bank (Norway), the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, and the Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden). These facilities, like those already established between the Federal Reserve and other central banks, are designed to help lessen strains in global U.S. dollar funding markets, thereby mitigating the effects of these strains on the supply of credit to households and businesses, both domestically and abroad. These new facilities will support the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts up to $60 billion each for the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Bank of Korea, the Banco de Mexico, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, and the Sveriges Riksbank and $30 billion each for the Danmarks Nationalbank, the Norges Bank, and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. These U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements will be in place for at least six months. The Federal Reserve also has standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Swap Lines FAQs
The Federal Reserve Board announced today that it will establish a Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. Commercial paper markets directly finance a wide range of economic activity, supplying credit and funding for auto loans and mortgages as well as liquidity to meet the operational needs of a range of companies. By ensuring the smooth functioning of this market, particularly in times of strain, the Federal Reserve is providing credit that will support families, businesses, and jobs across the economy. The CPFF will provide a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of commercial paper through a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that will purchase unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper rated A1/P1 (as of March 17, 2020) directly from eligible companies. The CPFF program is established by the Federal Reserve under the authority of Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary. The commercial paper market has been under considerable strain in recent days as businesses and households face greater uncertainty in light of the coronavirus outbreak. By eliminating much of the risk that eligible issuers will not be able to repay investors by rolling over their maturing commercial paper obligations, this facility should encourage investors to once again engage in term lending in the commercial paper market. An improved commercial paper market will enhance the ability of businesses to maintain employment and investment as the nation deals with the coronavirus outbreak. The Treasury will provide $10 billion of credit protection to the Federal Reserve in connection with the CPFF from the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF). The Federal Reserve will then provide financing to the SPV under the CPFF. Its loans will be secured by all of the assets of the SPV. A brief description of the program is attached. More detailed program terms and conditions and an operational calendar will be subsequently published. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Updated term sheet:Commercial Paper Funding Facility
To support the credit needs of American households and businesses, the Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it will establish a Primary Dealer Credit Facility, or PDCF. The facility will allow primary dealers to support smooth market functioning and facilitate the availability of credit to businesses and households. The PDCF will offer overnight and term funding with maturities up to 90 days and will be available on March 20, 2020. It will be in place for at least six months and may be extended as conditions warrant. Credit extended to primary dealers under this facility may be collateralized by a broad range of investment grade debt securities, including commercial paper and municipal bonds, and a broad range of equity securities. The interest rate charged will be the primary credit rate, or discount rate, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. More detailed terms and conditions and an operational calendar will be subsequently released. The PDCF is established under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Updated Term Sheet:Primary Dealer Credit Facility
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced a six-month delay in the planned implementation of policy changes to procedures governing the provision of intraday credit to U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations (FBOs). On April 1, 2019, the Board approved amendments to Part II of the PSR policy, which establishes the maximum levels of daylight overdrafts that depository institutions may incur in their Federal Reserve accounts. The changes were initially scheduled to become effective on April 1, 2020. In light of the challenges posed by the coronavirus, the Board is delaying implementation until October 1, 2020. This additional time will allow FBOs and the Federal Reserve Banks to focus on heightened priorities rather than establishing new arrangements for accessing intraday credit. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it will delay by six months the effective date for its revised control framework. The delay will reduce operational burden and allow institutions to focus on current economic conditions. In January, the Board finalized a revised framework that simplifies and increases the transparency of its rules for determining when one company controls another company for purposes of the Bank Holding Company Act and Home Owners' Loan Act. If a company has control over a banking organization, the company generally becomes subject to the Board's rules and regulations. The six-month delay will move the effective date to September 30, from the original date of April 1. No changes were made to the framework itself. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced a technical change to support the U.S. economy and allow banks to continue lending to creditworthy households and businesses. The interim final rule will phase in gradually, as intended, the automatic restrictions associated with a firm's "total loss absorbing capacity," or TLAC, buffer requirements, if the levels decline. TLAC is an additional cushion of capital and long-term debt that could be used to recapitalize a bank if it is in distress. The change will facilitate the use of firms' buffers to promote lending activity to households and businesses. Over the past decade, U.S. banks of all sizes have built up substantial levels of capital and liquidity in excess of their minimum requirements. The technical change mirrors an interim final rule announced last week by the bank regulatory agencies that applies to a firm's capital levels. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal RegisternoticeHTML Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: City National Bancshares Corporation, Newark, New JerseyWritten Agreement, dated December 14, 2010Terminated February 25, 2020 Community Financial Holding Company, Inc., Duluth, GeorgiaWritten Agreement, dated January 7, 2010Terminated March 4, 2020 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved action on Sunday by the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and actions on Monday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Dallas, and San Francisco, decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 1-3/4 percent to 1/4 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Wednesday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Atlanta, decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2-1/4 percent to 1-3/4 percent, effective immediately. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board has approved actions on Tuesday by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco, decreasing the discount rate (the primary credit rate) at the Banks from 2-1/4 percent to 1-3/4 percent, effective March 4, 2020. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday approved a rule to simplify its capital rules for large banks, preserving the strong capital requirements already in place. The "stress capital buffer," or SCB, integrates the Board's stress test results with its non-stress capital requirements. As a result, required capital levels for each firm would more closely match its risk profile and likely losses as measured via the Board's stress tests. The rule is broadly similar to the proposal from April 2018, with a few changes in response to comments. "The stress capital buffer materially simplifies the post-crisis capital framework for banks, while maintaining the strong capital requirements that are the hallmark of the framework," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. The SCB uses the results from the Board's supervisory stress tests, which are one component of the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), to help determine each firm's capital requirements for the coming year. By combining the Board's stress tests—which project the capital needs of each firm under adverse economic conditions—with the Board's non-stress capital requirements, large banks will now be subject to a single, forward-looking, and risk-sensitive capital framework. The simplification would result in banks needing to meet eight capital requirements, instead of the current 13. The SCB framework preserves the strong capital requirements established after the financial crisis. In particular, the changes would increase capital requirements for the largest and most complex banks and decrease requirements for less complex banks. Based on stress test data from 2013 to 2019, common equity tier 1 capital requirements would increase by $11 billion in aggregate, a 1 percent increase from current capital requirements. A firm's SCB will vary in size throughout the economic cycle depending on several factors, including the firm's risks. To reduce the incentive for firms to take on risk and further simplify the framework, the final rule does not include a stress leverage buffer as proposed. All banks would continue to be subject to ongoing, non-stress leverage requirements. Large banks have substantially increased their capital since the first round of stress tests in 2009. The common equity capital ratio of the banks in the 2019 CCAR has more than doubled from 4.9 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2019, with total capital doubling to more than $1 trillion. Also on Wednesday, the Board released the instructions for the 2020 CCAR cycle. The instructions confirm that 34 banks will participate in this year's test. CCAR consists of both the stress tests that assess firms' capital needs under stress and, for the largest and most complex banks, a qualitative evaluation of the practices these firms use to determine their capital needs in normal times and under stress. Results will be released by June 30. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles Statement by Governor Brainard Board memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice (PDF) Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2020 Summary Instructions (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday broadened its program of support for the flow of credit to households and businesses by taking steps to enhance the liquidity and functioning of crucial money markets. Through the establishment of a Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or MMLF, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston will make loans available to eligible financial institutions secured by high-quality assets purchased by the financial institution from money market mutual funds. Money market funds are common investment tools for families, businesses, and a range of companies. The MMLF will assist money market funds in meeting demands for redemptions by households and other investors, enhancing overall market functioning and credit provision to the broader economy. The attached term sheet details the types of assets, including unsecured and secured commercial paper, agency securities, and Treasury securities, that are eligible, as well as additional information. The MMLF program will purchase a broader range of assets, but its structure is very similar to the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or AMLF, that operated from late 2008 to early 2010. The MMLF is established by the Federal Reserve under the authority of Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary. The Department of the Treasury will provide $10 billion of credit protection to the Federal Reserve in connection with the MMLF from the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund. More detailed program terms and conditions and an operational calendar will be published soon. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Updated term sheet:Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Frequently Asked Questions MMLF Request Form Agreements and documents ABCP MMMF Liquidity Facility
The Federal Reserve Board is encouraged by the notable increase in discount window borrowing this week with banks demonstrating a willingness to use the discount window as a source of funding to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. This uptick follows the recentchangesto the discount window announced by the Federal Reserve and the federal banking regulators' recent statement encouraging financial institutions to use the discount window. In thatstatement, the Federal Reserve and other federal regulatory agencies underscored the role of the discount window. By providing ready access to funding, the discount window helps depository institutions manage their liquidity risks efficiently and avoid actions that have negative consequences for their customers, such as withdrawing credit during times of market stress. The Federal Reserve welcomes continued use of the discount window by banks to help them channel credit to households and businesses. The Federal Reserve Board publishes aggregate borrowing information on a weekly basis in itsFactors Affecting Reserve Balances(H.4.1)statistical release. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday expanded its program of support for the flow of credit to the economy by taking steps to enhance the liquidity and functioning of crucial state and municipal money markets. Through the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or MMLF, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston will now be able to make loans available to eligible financial institutions secured by certain high-quality assets purchased from single state and other tax-exempt municipal money market mutual funds. The attached term sheet details the assets that are eligible under the MMLF program, as well as additional information. More detailed program terms and conditions and an operational calendar will be published soon. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Updated term sheet:Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released a series of Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Analytics Data Tables. This data resource is intended to provide insight into the historical relationship between bank lending activity and regulatory assessments. The tables combine Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, CRA small business and small farm loan data, and manually extracted data from CRA Performance Evaluations. Bank attributes, deposit, branching, demographic, and other third-party vendor data supplement the tables. More information about this database can be found here:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/data_tables.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve recognizes that small financial institutions may need additional time to submit certain regulatory reports in light of staffing priorities and disruptions caused by the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). The Federal Reserve will not take action against a financial institution with $5 billion or less in total assets for submitting its March 31, 2020, Consolidated Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies (FR Y-9C) or Financial Statements of U.S. Nonbank Subsidiaries of U.S. Bank Holding Companies (FR Y-11) after the official filing deadline, as long as the applicable report is submitted within 30 days of the official filing due date. Institutions are encouraged to contact their Reserve Bank in advance of the official filing deadline if they anticipate a delayed submission. Institutions anticipating difficulty submitting their reports within the 30 days following the official filing due date, or experiencing challenges in obtaining director attestations, should likewise contact their Reserve Bank. OnMarch 25, the federal financial institution regulators and state regulators offered similar reporting relief to financial institutions affected by COVID-19 for their March 31, 2020 Reports of Condition and Income (Call Reports). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday provided additional information to financial institutions on how its supervisory approach is adjusting in light of the coronavirus. In particular: The Board recognizes that the current situation is significantly affecting areas of the country in different ways and will work with financial institutions to understand the specific issues they are facing. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve System on Monday released the 2019 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. An independent public accounting firm engaged by the Board has issued unqualified opinions on the financial statements and on the Board's and each Bank's internal controls over financial reporting. The audited financial statements provide information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks and the Board as of December 31, 2019. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2019 earnings were approximately $55.5 billion, representing a decrease of $7.6 billion from 2018. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $54.9 billion in 2019. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $102.7 billion, a decrease of $9.5 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances during the year was $34.9 billion, a decrease of $3.5 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on securities sold under agreements to repurchase was $6.0 billion, an increase of $1.5 billion from the previous year. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $7.4 billion, including assessments of $2.2 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2019, were approximately $4.2 trillion, an increase of $116 billion from the previous year. Total Reserve Bank assets were composed primarily of $4.1 trillion of securities under agreements to resell, U.S. Treasury securities, and federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise mortgage-backed securities acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website atwww.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. The Board engages KPMG LLP, an independent public accounting firm, to conduct annual audits of these financial statements in accordance with auditing standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and, for the Board of Governors audit only, the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards. The public accounting firm also conducts audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website atwww.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Reserve System audited annual financial statements