Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemCommodity Futures Trading CommissionFederal Deposit Insurance CorporationOffice of Comptroller of the CurrencySecurities and Exchange Commission Five federal financial regulatory agencies on Thursday invited public comment on a proposal to modify regulations implementing the Volcker rule's general prohibition on banking entities investing in or sponsoring hedge funds or private equity funds—known as "covered funds." Since the regulations implementing the Volcker rule were finalized in 2013, the rule has created compliance uncertainty and imposed limits on certain banking services and activities that the Volcker rule was not intended to restrict. To address these concerns, the agencies simplified requirements for the proprietary trading restrictions in November 2019. Today's proposal would modify the restrictions for banking entities investing in, sponsoring, or having certain relationships with covered funds. In particular, the joint agency proposal would improve and streamline the covered funds portion of the rule, address the treatment of certain foreign funds, and permit banking entities to offer financial services and engage in other permissible activities that do not raise concerns that the Volcker rule was intended to address. The proposed changes were jointly developed by the Federal Reserve Board, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. Comments will be accepted until April 1, 2020. Federal Registernotice Opening Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on January 30, 2020
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the designation of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2020. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as Chair and a second as Deputy Chair. Following are the names of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs designated by the Board for 2020: BostonPhillip L. Clay, professor emeritus of city planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, renamed Chair. Christina Hull Paxson, president, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, renamed Deputy Chair. New YorkDenise Scott, executive vice president, Local Initiatives Support Corporation,New York, New York, renamed Chair. Rosa M. Gil, founder, president, and chief executive officer, Comunilife, Inc., New York, New York,renamed Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaPhoebe Haddon, chancellor, Rutgers University - Camden, Camden, New Jersey, named Chair. Madeline Bell, president and chief executive officer, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, named Deputy Chair. ClevelandDawne S. Hickton, president and chief operating officer, Jacobs Aerospace, Technology, and Nuclear, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. Dwight E. Smith, president and chief executive officer, Sophisticated Systems, Inc., Columbus, Ohio, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondKathy J. Warden, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Northrop Grumman Corporation, Falls Church, Virginia, renamed Chair. Eugene A. Woods, president and chief executive officer, Atrium Health, Charlotte, North Carolina, named Deputy Chair. AtlantaMyron A. Gray, president, U.S. operations (retired), United Parcel Service, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Chair. Elizabeth A. Smith, executive chair, Bloomin' Brands, Inc., Tampa, Florida, renamed Deputy Chair. ChicagoE. Scott Santi, chairman and chief executive officer, Illinois Tool Works Inc., Glenview, Illinois, named Chair. Wright L. Lassiter, III, president and chief executive officer, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, named Deputy Chair. St. LouisSuzanne Sitherwood, president and chief executive officer, Spire Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, named Chair. James M. McKelvey, Jr., founder and chief executive officer, Invisibly, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chair. MinneapolisSrilata Zaheer, dean, Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, named Chair. Harry D. Melander, president, Minnesota Building and Construction Trades Council, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chair. Kansas CityJim Farrell, president, Farrell Growth Group LLC, Omaha, Nebraska, named Chair. Edmond Johnson, president and owner, Premier Manufacturing, Inc., Frederick, Colorado, named Deputy Chair. DallasGreg L. Armstrong, chairman and chief executive officer (retired), Plains All American Pipeline L.P., Houston, Texas, renamed Chair. Thomas J. Falk, chairman and chief executive officer (retired), Kimberly-Clark Corporation, Dallas, Texas, named Deputy Chair. San FranciscoBarry M. Meyer, chairman and chief executive officer (retired), Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., and chairman and founder, North Ten Mile Associates, Los Angeles, California, renamed Chair. Rosemary Turner, president north California district (retired), United Parcel Service, Inc., Oakland, California, renamed Deputy Chair. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and the president of the council for 2020. The CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on the CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Further information on the CDIAC, including records from past meetings, can be foundhere. Dorothy A. Savarese, chair and chief executive officer of Cape Cod 5, Orleans, Mass., will serve as CDIAC president in 2020. The other members of CDIAC in 2020 are: Erik BeguinChief Executive Officer and FounderAustin Capital BankAustin, Texas Dabney T.P. Gilliam, Jr.President and Chief Executive OfficerThe Bank of Charlotte CountyPhenix, Va. Douglas S. GordonPresident and Chief Executive OfficerWaterStone Bank, SSBWauwatosa, Wis. Brad KoehnRegional PresidentMidwest BankLincoln, Neb. Shari LavenChief Executive OfficerViking BankAlexandria, Minn. Faheem A. MasoodPresident and Chief Executive OfficerESL Federal Credit UnionRochester, N.Y. David R. Melville IIIChief Executive Officer and Presidentb1BANKBaton Rouge, La. Margaret OldnerChief Executive OfficerStone BankLittle Rock, Ark. T. Michael PricePresident and Chief Financial OfficerFirst Commonwealth Financial Corp.Indiana, Pa. Andrew J. RybackPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPlumas BankQuincy, Calif. Jeane M. VidoniPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPenn Community BankPerkasie, Pa. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced preliminary results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $54.9 billion to the U.S. Treasury. The 2019 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in March and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2019 estimated net income of $55.5 billion represents a decrease of $7.6 billion from 2018. The decline in net income was primarily attributable to a decrease of $9.5 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations and a $1.5 billion increase in interest expense on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. A $3.5 billion decrease in interest expense associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions partially offset those factors. Net income for 2019 was derived primarily from $102.8 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations--U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities, and GSE debt securities. The Federal Reserve Banks had interest expense of $35.0 billion primarily associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions, and incurred interest expense of $6.0 billion on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $4.5 billion in 2019. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $837 million for the costs related to producing, issuing, and retiring currency, $814 million for Board expenditures, and $519 million to fund the operations of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Additional earnings were derived from income from services of $444 million. Statutory dividends totaled $714 million in 2019. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2010 through 2019 (estimated). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Alden State Bank, Alden, New YorkFlood insurance violations civil money penalty, dated January 24, 2020. Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: United Bank of El Paso del Norte, El Paso, TexasCease and Desist Order dated December 30, 2019 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday finalized a rule to simplify and increase the transparency of the Board's rules for determining control of a banking organization. If a company has control over a banking organization, the company generally becomes subject to the Board's rules and regulations. The final rule is largely consistent with the proposal, establishing a comprehensive and public framework to determine when a company controls a bank or a bank controls a company. Previously, control reviews have been situation-specific and often followed precedents that were not available to firms or to the public. The framework uses several factors to determine if a company has control over a bank. The key factors include the company's total voting and non-voting equity investment in the bank; director, officer, and employee overlaps between the company and the bank; and the scope of business relationships between the company and the bank. The rule clarifies and increases transparency by describing the combination of factors that would and would not trigger control concerns. The attached chart shows how different combinations of factors would or would not raise control concerns. The rule will be effective on April 1. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice (PDF) Visual (PDF) Statement by Governor Lael Brainard Open Board Meeting on January 30, 2020
Chair Powell swears in Michelle W. Bowman as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Click here for more high-resolution photos. Michelle W. Bowman was sworn in for her second term as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on Thursday. The oath was administered by Chair Jerome H. Powell in the Board Room. President Trump renominated Governor Bowman for a full term on April 4, 2019. Governor Bowman was reconfirmed as a Board member by the United States Senate on September 12, 2019, and her term expires on January 31, 2034. Governor Bowman first took office as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on November 26, 2018, to fill an unexpired term ending January 31, 2020. A biography of Governor Bowman is available on the Board's website:www.federalreserve.gov/bios/. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Biography of Governor Michelle W. Bowman
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from November 4 and December 11, 2019. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Friday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 10-11, 2019. A summary of economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for the meeting is also included as an addendum to these minutes. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes and in the Summary of Economic Projections are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 10-11, 2019:HTML|PDF
WASHINGTON—Federal bank regulatory agencies find that the share and amount of loan commitments with the lowest supervisory ratings rose slightly between 2018 and 2019, according to the Shared National Credit (SNC) Program Review. Total commitments with low ratings remain elevated compared to lows reached during prior periods of strong economic performance. The report, which was released today by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), reflects reviews primarily covering SNC loans originated on or before June 30, 2019. It finds that credit risk associated with leveraged lending remains elevated. Lenders have fewer protections and risks have increased in leveraged loan terms through the current long period of economic expansion since the last recession. Most banks have adopted credit risk-management practices to monitor and control this evolving risk. However, some of these controls have not been tested in an economic downturn. The agencies require banks to have risk-management processes that can identify and adapt to changing market conditions. The 2019 SNC portfolio included 5,474 borrowers, totaling $4.8 trillion, up from $4.4 trillion in 2018. U.S. banks held the greatest volume of SNC commitments at 44.4 percent of the portfolio, followed by foreign banking organizations and other investor entities such as securitization pools, hedge funds, insurance companies, and pension funds. Total commitments increased by $396 billion, or 8.9 percent, from third quarter of 2018 to the third quarter of 2019. Growth was concentrated in investment grade equivalent transactions. The number of borrowers and facilities increased modestly in 2019 after a sizeable decline in 2018 associated with an increase in the minimum commitment threshold to $100 million that was effective January 1, 2018 Loan commitments were reviewed and grouped into four categories by the severity of their risk, from less severe to more severe: special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss. The last three of which are known as "classified." Overall, the level of loans rated below "pass" as a percentage of the total SNC portfolio increased slightly from 6.7 percent to 6.9 percent. Bank-identified leveraged loan commitments represent 49 percent of total SNC commitments. Leveraged lending was the primary contributor to the overall special mention and classified rates. Investors outside the banking industry held the greatest volume of special mention and classified commitments, followed by U.S. banks and foreign banking organizations. The agencies conduct SNC reviews in the first and third calendar quarters with some banks receiving two reviews and others receiving a single review each year. The agencies issue a single statement annually that includes combined findings from the previous 12 months. This practice presents a complete view of the entire SNC portfolio, which can be compared with prior years' reports. The next report will be published following the third quarter 2020 SNC examination. For additional information, see the attached SNC Program Review Report.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Meeting 2020, Washington, D.C. It's a great pleasure to be with you today at the ABA Banking Law Committee's annual meeting. I left the practice of law—and immersion in the company of lawyers—closing in on 20 years ago now, but there have been many times during my long sojourn among businessmen and economists that I have reflected with fondness and some nostalgia on the famous adage of Harrison Tweed (the "Tweed" of Milbank, Tweed, a reformer of the bar, the "most democratic of aristocrats," and the last man to unironically wear a cape in the lobby of the Chase Manhattan Plaza) which most of you can no doubt recite by heart: "I have a high opinion of lawyers. With all their faults, they stack up well against those in every other occupation or profession. They are better to work with or play with or fight with or drink with than most other varieties of mankind."Speaking here feels a lot like coming home. This afternoon, I would like to talk with you about the outwardly mundane but increasingly consequential topic of bank supervision. Twenty years ago, when I would have been among your number at this meeting, this would have been my cue to pull out my Blackberry and start checking my emails. The structure and content ofregulationwas both intellectually interesting and professionally meaningful; I considered banksupervision, by contrast, as both too workaday and too straightforward to merit the commitment of much legal horsepower or personal attention. I could perhaps have been excused by the callowness of youth, yet it was a common view at the time. Having now been immersed for the last two years both in the practice of supervision and in the complementary relationship between the regulatory and supervisory processes, I realize that this wasn't true then, and is certainly not true now. It is not a drafting accident that the Dodd-Frank Act gave my position at the Federal Reserve the title of Vice Chairman forSupervision. Notwithstanding the extensive reform of bank regulation after the crisis, which has had much consequence for the industry (most of it salutary) it is the process of examination and supervision that constitutes the bulk of our ongoing engagement with the industry and through which our policy objectives are given effect. This division of labor is important for lawyers and policymakers to think about deeply because the processes of regulation and supervision are necessarily different in crucial respects. Regulation establishes a binding public framework implementing relevant statutory imperatives. Because a rule is designed to apply generally, rules must be based on general principles intended to achieve general aims, rather than reverse-engineered to generate specific effects for specific institutions. Given their general applicability, there must be a general process for all those with an interest—industry, academics, citizens, Congress—to have notice of, and opportunity to comment on all rules, ensuring that all potential effects and points of view are taken into account in the rule's crafting. And given their general function, rules must be clear and public: Those affected must know what to expect and what is expected. Supervision, by contrast, implements the regulatory framework through close engagement with the particular facts about particular firms: their individual capital and liquidity positions, the diverse composition of their distinct portfolios of assets, their business strategies, the nature of their operations, the strengths and weaknesses of their management. Much of the granular information used by supervisors is, accordingly, proprietary and confidential, and many of their judgments and decisions are closely tailored to specific circumstances. Given the strong public interest in the safe, sound, and efficient operation of the financial industry and the potential for hair-raising and widespread adverse social consequences of private misjudgment or misconduct in that industry, close and regular supervision of this sort can help us all sleep restfully. Yet, the confidential and tailored nature of supervision sits uncomfortably with the responsibilities of government in a democracy. In the United States, we have a long-standing, well-articulated framework for ensuring that regulations conform with the principles of generality, predictability, publicity, and consultation described above. Supervision—for good reason, in my view—is not subject to this formal framework. But it is currently not subject toanyspecific process constraint promoting publicity or universality. This leaves it open to the charge, and sometimes to the fact, of capriciousness, unaccountability, unequal application, and excessive burden. Here, then, is a conundrum. We have a public interest in a confidential, tailored, rapid-acting and closely informed system of bank supervision. And we have a public interest in all governmental processes being fair, predictable, efficient, and accountable. How do we square this circle? In my time with you today, we will not do more than scratch the surface of this question. It is a complex and consequential issue that, for decades now, has received far too little attention from practitioners, academics, policymakers and the public. Evaluating this question will be a significant focus of mine going forward, and I hope that there will be much discussion in many fora from which we at the Fed, and at other regulators, can learn. So today, I simply want to open the exploration of some these conceptual issues, and then offer some specific suggestions—by no means comprehensive—on some obvious and immediate ways that supervision can become more transparent, efficient, and effective. The Importance of TransparencyLet me begin by delving a little more deeply into the distinction between regulation and supervision and the process applicable to both. In delegating to agencies such as the Fed the significant power to write regulations, Congress has codified a regulatory process that emphasizes transparency. This process was born in the 1930s, in the tumult of government expansion that was the New Deal, when Congress began a decade-long debate over how to manage the new regulatory state. The result, the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), was, I should note, developed with the active involvement of the American Bar Association. The APA continues to serve as the basis for the public disclosure and participation required for agency rule-writing and for the judicial review affected parties are guaranteed to challenge rules. This transparency is intended to prevent arbitrary, capricious, and thus ineffective regulation by inviting broad public participation and mandating a deliberate public debate over the content of proposed rules. One obvious purpose of this transparency is to provide clarity and predictability: it helps make clear how agencies are considering exercising their discretion. The significant process protections in laws such as the APA are also meant to ensure fairness. The wisdom behind this approach is that fairness both helps bring forth more considered and effective regulations and builds respect for and adherence to the law, which is essential for enforcement. Transparency is central to our ability to assert that our rules are fair. Not everything that government does, however, can be accomplished in exactly the same way that regulations are written. One of these things is bank supervision. Bank SupervisionBanks are subjected to supervision, in addition to regulation, as an additional form of government oversight because of their complexity, opacity, vulnerability to runs, and indispensable role in the economy, enabling payments, transmitting monetary policy, and providing credit. The government provides a safety net to banks in the form of deposit insurance, and in return, banks are subject to government oversight that mimics some of the monitoring that the private sector would provide, absent the government safety net. The bank regulatory framework sets the core architectural requirements for the banking system, but it isn't enough to set the rules and walk away like Voltaire's god. The potential consequences of disruption in the financial system are so far-reaching, and the erosion of market discipline resulting from the government safety net sufficiently material, that it is neither safe nor reasonable to rely entirely on after-the-fact enforcement to ensure regulatory compliance. Supervisors are in a good position to monitor individual firms' idiosyncratic risks. And in addition to what they do at individual banks, supervisors monitor for risk that may be building among clusters of banks or across the banking system. These "horizontal" exams across multiple banks help highlight new or emerging risks and help examiners understand how banks are managing these risks. Through their engagement with banks, supervisors promote good risk management and thus help banks preemptively avert excessive risk taking that would be costly and inefficient to correct after the fact. Where banks fall materially out of compliance with a regulatory framework or act in a manner that poses a threat to their safety and soundness, supervisors can act rapidly to address the failures that led to the lack of compliance or threat to safety and soundness. This is a crucial point: Supervision is most effective when expectations are clear and supervision promotes an approach to risk management that deters bad behavior and decisions by banks. Clearly communicating those expectations is essential to effective supervision, and in a larger sense, clear two-way communication is the essence of effective supervision. Supervisors rely on banks to be frank and forthcoming, and supervisors in turn can help secure that frankness by explaining what their expectations are and why their expectations are reasonable, not arbitrary or capricious. Greater transparency in supervision about the content of our expectations and about how we form our expectations and judgments can make supervision more effective by building trust and respect for the fairness and rationality of supervision. I don't believe the Federal Reserve has communicated as clearly as it could with the banks we supervise. More transparency and more clarity about what we want to achieve as supervisors and how we approach our work will improve supervision, and I have several specific proposals. Broadly speaking, these actions fall into three categories: (1) large bank supervision, (2) transparency improvements, and (3) overall supervisory process improvements. Large Bank SupervisionLast fall, we completed a cornerstone of the recent banking legislation to tailor our rules for regional banks. This was entirely consistent with a principle at the heart of our existing work: Firms that pose greater risks should meet higher standards and receive more scrutiny. Our previous rules relied heavily on a firm's total assets as a proxy for these risks and for the costs the financial system would incur if a firm failed. This simple asset proxy was clear and critical, rough and ready, but neither risk sensitive nor complete. Our new rules employ a broader set of indicators, like short-term wholesale funding and off-balance-sheet exposures, to assess the need for greater supervisory scrutiny. That said, the composition of our supervisory portfolios has not yet been aligned with our recent tailoring rules. For example, the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) portfolio includes all Category I firms, which have the greatest risk profile, along with certain Category II and Category III firms, which are less systemic. Other Category II and Category III firms, on the other hand, are supervised under our large and foreign banking organizations (LFBO) portfolio. Since the crisis, we have been giving significant thought to the composition of our supervisory portfolios, and, in particular to whether and how we should address the significant decrease in size and risk profile of the foreign firms in the LISCC portfolio over the past decade. Because of these changes, which I will describe in more detail momentarily, I believe there is a compelling justification to make changes today to the composition of the foreign banks in the LISCC portfolio. Separately and in keeping with the goal of transparency, I think it is important that all the Fed's supervisory portfolios have a clear and transparent definition. Today nearly all of our supervisory portfolios have such a crisp and clear formulaic definition specified in the public domain, but the LISCC portfolio does not. My goal is to develop, prospectively, a clear and transparent standard for identifying LISCC firms. My preferred approach for achieving this objective would be to align the LISCC portfolio with our recent tailoring categorizations. I believe we should draw the LISCC line to coincide with Category I. The justification for this line-drawing is that Category I firms pose the most systemic risk and require the most supervisory attention. In this state of the world, Category II and III firms would remain subject to heightened supervisory standards that are commensurate with their risk profile. Allow me to draw out what this approach could mean for the foreign banks that currently are in the LISCC portfolio. Since 2010, these four banks have significantly shrunk their U.S. footprint, and their U.S. operations are much less risky than they used to be. Since 2008, the size of the LISCC FBOs' combined U.S. assets has shrunk by about 50 percent, and they have reduced the assets at their broker-dealers from a peak of $1.9 trillion in 2008 to $340 billion today, a reduction of over 80%. In addition, the estimated systemic impact of the LISCC FBOs today is much smaller than the U.S. GSIBs. The average method 1 GSIB score of the combined U.S. operations of the LISCC FBOs is less than a quarter of the average GSIB score of the six non-processing U.S. GSIBs. Thus, if any foreign banks move out of the LISCC portfolio based on this de-risking, they would move into the LFBO portfolio, where they would be supervised alongside other foreign and domestic firms with similar risk profiles. Notably, this change in supervisory portfolio would have no effect on the regulatory capital or liquidity requirements that currently apply to the four LISCC FBOs. Similarly, the change would not result in a loss of insight into the activities of these firms. In the same spirit, I think we should consider publishing the internal procedural materials that the Fed uses to supervise the LISCC firms, sometimes referred to as the Program Manual. The Manual contains a description of the main supervisory processes for identifying risks and our approach for addressing them. Publishing the Manual would help the public and the banks better understand why we take the actions that we take as supervisors and would demystify some of our processes. If we took these two simple steps—defining LISCC firms and publishing the Program Manual that governs our supervisory approach—it would go a long way in helping to make our supervisory practices more understandable and accessible without undermining supervisory effectiveness. Let me now turn to the ratings framework that applies to all large holding companies. A firm's supervisory rating, which is confidential, is important because it affects things such as the firm's ability to engage in mergers and acquisitions and to enter new lines of business. Just over a year ago, the Board began implementing a new ratings framework for large holding companies called the large financial institutions (LFI) ratings framework. The LFI ratings framework focuses on three components of a firm's operations: capital, liquidity, and governance and controls. We inaugurated the LFI ratings framework for LISCC firms in January 2019 and for other large holding companies at the beginning of this year. As we gain more experience with LFI, we will be paying close attention to how the new rating system is working and whether it is achieving its intended purpose. There are two features of the ratings system that I will be particularly interested to monitor, and which may well require adjustment. These are the embedding of qualitative "risk management" standards in the capital and liquidity components of the ratings (as opposed to standardized quantitative measures of capital and liquidity adequacy) and the ascetic principle by which a firm's "well managed" status is determined by its lowest component rating, no matter how good the bank is at everything else. Regarding our stress tests under the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), I continue to look for ways to make the tests more transparent without making them game-able and without diluting their potency as a supervisory tool. I will mention three of these transparency-enhancing ideas. First, I expect that we will continue to provide more transparency on the models used in CCAR. We started providing improved transparency on models last year, and as I have previously said, we will remain on that path until we have released substantial details on all of our key models. We also continue to consider ways to increase the transparency around the scenarios we use in CCAR, including, for example, by modifying our scenario design policy statement to provide greater transparency on the design of the global market shock component of the stress tests. Second, I expect that as part of the stress capital buffer, we will give banks significantly more time to review their stress test results and understand their capital requirements before we demand their final capital plan. Firms are currently permitted to revise and resubmit their capital plans after receiving their stress test results. But it is done on a short timeframe, and allowing additional time would produce better results without in any way reducing the stringency of the stress tests. Fundamentally, I think banks will be better able to do intelligent capital planning if we provide them with their complete set of regulatory capital requirements before we require submission of a capital plan. Third and finally, we continue to look for ways to reduce the volatility of stress-test requirements from year to year. We are considering a number of options, such as averaging outcomes over multiple years or averaging the results of the current year's stress test with the results of one or more previous years. Again, the goal here is not to make the tests less strenuous but to give banks a greater opportunity to plan for them and to meet our expectations ex ante rather than through an ex post remedial process. Transparency ImprovementsThe next three actions I'm proposing also relate to improved transparency, and they would improve our processes for supervising all banks. The first would be to create a word-searchable database on the Board's website with the historical interpretations by the Board and its staff of all significant rules. Regulatory interpretations by Board staff have grown piecemeal over the decades and haven't consistently been treated as the valuable resource they are. The Board's website has select interpretations of many laws but does not provide a comprehensive, user-friendly collection of regulatory interpretations, FAQs, and commentary. This project will require some effort of course, as well as vigilance to keep the interpretations up to date, but I believe that the end result will be well worth it. The second of these transparency actions would be putting significant supervisory guidance out for public comment. The Board already invites comments on its regulations, as required under the APA, and regularly invites comment on some supervisory guidance and statements of policy. This practice of seeking comment on guidance leads to better, more informed supervision and better engagement by banks. I would like the Board to seek comment on more supervisory guidance going forward. Third and finally, as another improvement related to guidance, I support submitting significant supervisory guidance to Congress for purposes of the Congressional Review Act. Currently, the Fed does this for rules but not guidance. I support doing so for significant guidance because significant guidance, though nonbinding, can still have a material impact on bank behavior. I believe this step would enhance the Fed's accountability and help build support for supervisory guidance. Overall Supervisory Process ImprovementsThe last category of proposals includes five areas of improvement that all relate to what we call the "supervisory process"—how we go about conducting our responsibilities. Like my other suggestions, these are all rooted in common sense with a view toward maintaining firm and fair supervision. The first is to increase the ability of supervised firms to share Federal Reserve confidential supervisory information (CSI) with employees, affiliates, service providers, and other government agencies to promote greater compliance with laws and facilitate the response to enforcement actions. We have received feedback that our rules can prevent banks from sharing CSI with a wide variety of relevant parties who need to know this information in order to help the bank remediate identified supervisory issues. We issued a proposal last year to address this shortcoming in our CSI rules, and I expect the Board will be able to issue a final CSI rule later this year. The second process improvement is having the Board adopt a rule on how we use guidance in the supervisory process. I would expect the rule to state that the Board will follow and respect the limits of administrative law in carrying out its supervisory responsibilities. In particular, consistent with the September 2018 interagency statement on guidance, we would affirm the sensible principles that guidance is not binding and "non-compliance" with guidance may not form the basis for an enforcement action (such as a cease-and-desist order) or supervisory criticism (such as a Matter Requiring Attention (MRA)). This rule would be binding on the Board and on all staff of the Federal Reserve System, including bank examiners. The third and fourth process improvements relate to supervisory communication. The third improvement is to restore the "supervisory observation" category for lesser safety and soundness issues. This approach would provide supervisors with a tool—supervisory recommendations—for continuing to raise concerns about less pressing supervisory matters while focusing a bank's attention on the most urgent matters, those that would receive MRAs. We removed this category of supervisory commentary in 2013 to better focus bank management on deficiencies found during the supervision process. (By way of comparison, both the FDIC and OCC retained this tool.) On reflection, I think there is value in supervisory observations. They allow an examiner to give notice about a supervisory concern even if that concern has not risen to the level of an MRA. The fourth process improvement would be limiting future MRAs to violations of law, violations of regulation, and material safety and soundness issues. MRAs are supervisory communications that identify areas where banks are out of compliance with applicable legal standards or otherwise are engaged in practices that create substantial safety and soundness risks. MRAs identify the source of the compliance failure, deficiency, or safety and soundness weakness and generally include an expected timeframe for remediation. MRAs are not legally binding and are not enforcement actions. Nevertheless, MRAs carry weight because they can affect a bank's supervisory rating. In limiting MRAs to legal violations and significant supervisory concerns, we would take care to clearly define the breadth of what constitutes a "material safety and soundness issue." This distinction is important as a matter of fairness. Banks should be able to understand the line between MRAs significant enough to affect the bank's supervisory rating and less significant matters that don't affect a bank's supervisory rating but raise concerns that should be considered by banks. Greater fairness contributes to greater supervisory effectiveness. Together, the third and fourth process improvements would be calibrated to improve communications so that banks can focus on remediating key weaknesses while maintaining awareness of emerging ones. Ultimately, a bank that promptly corrects its material safety and soundness weaknesses will be better able to serve its customers and intermediate credit through a range of scenarios, including under stress. The final process improvement is to make routine our existing practice of having an independent review of important supervisory communications and guidance documents. We want to make sure that our supervisory communications, including MRAs, focus on violations of law and material safety and soundness issues and that these communications don't mistakenly give the impression that supervisory guidance is binding. We already closely scrutinize MRAs issued to the LISCC firms and in horizontal reviews of other large domestic and foreign banks. This extra scrutiny is a sensible practice that should be regularized and expanded across our supervisory portfolios. With respect to prospectively assessing future guidance, the key goals here would include reassessing the scope of key guidance documents, removing inappropriate bright lines from guidance, and removing any mandatory language from guidance. I will discuss each of these goals in turn. As I mentioned, the Board adopted a final tailoring rule last year that adjusted the regulatory standards applicable to banks, based on their risk profile. I think it would be useful for us to review our guidance in light of this tailoring exercise, such as guidance on stress testing and capital planning, and to update the scope of guidance where appropriate. Regarding bright lines, bright lines tend to carry the implication that the standard they are delineating is binding. For this reason, rules often include bright lines so that it is clear how to stay in compliance with the rule. Putting bright lines in guidance, even when the bright line is phrased as a "should" rather than as a requirement, blurs the line between guidance and rules, and for this reason, it is a practice we should avoid. For the same reason, it is inappropriate to put mandatory language in guidance. This practice can create the same distortions as the use of bright lines. ConclusionObviously, the incremental changes to our supervisory processes described above do not completely answer the question with which I began my remarks today: How can we square the public interest in agile supervision with the public interest in transparency and accountability? This should be an ongoing question of high priority, both at the Fed and more broadly among those who care about our system of financial regulation. Equally obviously, however, these suggestions would strengthen our practice of supervision and increase the vigor and credibility of our supervisors. The changes to supervision since the crisis have made the financial system stronger and more resilient than it was before. The incremental changes I have outlined, to increase transparency, accountability, and fairness, would make supervision more efficient and effective, and our financial system stronger and more stable.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Urban Institute, Washington, D.C. Good morning. I am pleased to be here at the Urban Institute to discuss how to strengthen the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), which is a key priority for the Federal Reserve. The CRA plays a vital role in bringing banks together with community members, small businesses, local officials, and community groups to make investments in their community's future.1That is why we are committed to getting CRA reform done right. The Origins and Purpose of the CRAAny successful reform must be grounded in the origins of the CRA and its ongoing importance to low- and moderate-income (LMI) neighborhoods. The CRA was one of several landmark pieces of legislation enacted in the wake of the civil rights movement intended to address inequities in the credit markets. By passing the CRA, Congress aimed to reverse the disinvestment associated with years of government policies and market actions that deprived lower-income areas of credit by redlining—using red-inked lines to separate neighborhoods deemed too risky.2By conferring an affirmative and continuing obligation on banks to help meet the credit needs in all of the neighborhoods they serve, the CRA has not only prompted banks to be more active lenders in LMI areas, but also important participants in multisector efforts to revitalize communities across the country. Pursuant to guidance from the Board of Governors, each of our Federal Reserve Banks houses a group of dedicated community development professionals and CRA examiners to help banks meet their CRA obligations. We are proud of our work in familiarizing banks with the CRA's provisions, introducing banks to potential partners in their communities, and convening conferences to disseminate research and best practices.3 The CRA plays a vital role in the ecosystem supporting economic opportunity in LMI communities in both rural and urban areas. Rather than direct funds to specific projects, the CRA encourages banks to engage on the priorities identified by local leaders and more broadly serve credit needs of small businesses and residents of these communities. By being inclusive in their lending and investing, banks help their local communities to thrive, which in turn benefits their core business. The recognition of this mutually beneficial relationship between banks and their local communities is one of the core strengths of the CRA and the reason our effort to revise the CRA regulations must focus on local needs and stakeholder input. What Have We Learned from Stakeholders?For several years, the federal banking regulators have been asking stakeholders for input on strengthening the CRA regulations to help banks better meet the credit needs of the local LMI communities they serve and more closely align with changes in the ways financial products and services are delivered. We also have heard calls from banking and community organizations for the use of metrics to provide greater upfront clarity about evaluation standards. We have heard that branches remain as important as ever to their local communities, even as the growth of mobile and online services has extended the geographic area that banks are serving.4The one message we have heard most consistently is that banks and community organizations alike value the activities they undertake under the auspices of the CRA and have invested considerable time and effort in the associated processes and reporting.5For that reason, stakeholders have asked the regulators to take care as we contemplate changes to the CRA.6 If the past is any guide, major updates to the CRA regulations happen once every few decades. So it is much more important to get reform right than to do it quickly. If we only have one opportunity for a few decades, I want to make sure CRA reform is based on the best analysis and ideas and the broadest input available. It is critical to analyze carefully the likely effects of any proposed changes on credit access and community development in LMI communities, as well as any additional reporting and procedural burdens for banks. Last year, we set out several principles to guide our work on CRA reform.7Revisions to the CRA regulations should reflect the credit needs of local communities and work consistently through the business cycle. They should be tailored to banks of different sizes and business strategies. They should provide greater clarity in advance about how activities will be evaluated. They should encourage banks to seek opportunities in distressed and underserved areas. And they should recognize that the CRA is one of several related laws to promote an inclusive financial sector. Grounding Metrics in Analysis Based on DataGuided by stakeholder input, we evaluated how to strengthen the regulation by using metrics to provide greater certainty about how activities will be evaluated, while remaining faithful to the core purpose of the CRA to make credit and retail banking services available in local LMI communities. Proposed changes to the CRA regulation must be grounded in analysis and data to avoid unintended consequences. Because consistent data on CRA-eligible activity were not readily available, our research staff set about creating a database based on over 6,000 written public CRA evaluations from a sample of some 3,700 banks of varying asset sizes, business models, geographic areas, and bank regulators.8The database includes the location, number, and amount of CRA-eligible loans and investments and the ratings associated with each bank's performance. The data go back to 2005 in order to assess how CRA performance and the associated ratings vary across the economic cycle. Metrics that Make SenseSo how can we use metrics to provide greater clarity about evaluations? I will sketch out a proposed approach that uses a set of tailored thresholds that are calibrated for local conditions. It starts by creating two tests: a retail test and community development test (figure 1). Broadly speaking, all retail banks would be evaluated under a retail test, which would assess a bank's record of providing retail loans and retail banking services in its assessment areas. Large banks, as well as wholesale and limited-purpose banks, would also be evaluated under a separate community development test that would evaluate a bank's record of providing community development loans, qualified investments, and services. Using bank and other publicly available data, we would be able to provide a bank with a dashboard indicating how its retail lending activity compares to thresholds for presumptive satisfactory performance that reflect the activity of other lenders and credit demand in the local area. Separate metrics reflecting a bank's assessment area can be provided related to the evaluation of its community development performance. Dividing evaluations into separate retail and community development tests is important. First, evaluating all retail banks under a stand-alone retail test is important to stay true to the CRA's core focus on providing credit in underserved communities in an assessment area. In contrast, an approach that combines all activity together runs the risk of encouraging some institutions to meet expectations primarily through a few large community development loans or investments rather than meeting local needs. Second, having separate tests ensures that expectations are tailored for banks of different sizes and business models. Only larger banks would be expected to meet the community development test along with the full retail test. Similar to today, smaller banks would have the option of having their retail banking services and community development activities evaluated in order to achieve an "Outstanding" rating, but it would not be required. Moreover, small banks below some threshold might have the option to be evaluated under the existing methodology. Third, separate retail and community development tests provide greater scope to calibrate the evaluation metrics to the opportunities available in the market, which can differ for retail lending and community development financing. After analyzing ways to use metrics across the board, we concluded that the value of retail services and community development services to a local community do not lend themselves easily to a monetary value metric comparable to the monetary value of loans and investments. The value of these services may vary greatly from community to community. It is difficult to monetize this value in a consistent way relative to the value of lending and investment, thus introducing the risk of skewing incentives inadvertently. For example, the services and leadership provided by a small bank located in a rural community may be vital to the success of that community, even if the dollar value of those services is small compared with a branch in a large city. Because of this concern, we are inclined to propose a set of qualitative standards to evaluate retail services within the retail test, and a separate set of qualitative standards to assess community development services within the community development test. Retail Test—Metrics for Retail LendingThe core of the retail lending test would be to use widely available data to assess two clear objectives: how well a bank is serving LMI borrowers, small businesses, and small farms in its assessment area, and how well a bank is serving LMI neighborhoods in its assessment area. The metrics used to evaluate these two questions would rely on loan counts rather than dollar value in order to avoid inadvertent biases in favor of fewer, higher-dollar value loans.9The metrics would be evaluated separately for each major product line in a bank's assessment area, which is important to tailor the use of metrics to a bank's business model. The proposed approach measures a bank's performance in serving the needs of both low- and moderate-income borrowers (and small businesses and small farms) and LMI places in the community. For mortgage loans, an LMI borrower distribution metric would calculate the percentage of a bank's number of loans made to LMI borrowers relative to its overall mortgage originations, and assess this percentage against an assessment area threshold determined by local demographics and the aggregate lending of other in-market competitors. A separate LMI neighborhood distribution metric would evaluate the percentage of a bank's number of loans in LMI tracts to its overall loan count and assess this against a threshold determined by local demographics and the aggregate lending of other in-market competitors. A bank that meets or exceeds both the LMI borrower and LMI neighborhood thresholds for each of its major product lines would be presumed to have a satisfactory-or-better level of retail lending performance in that assessment area. Using a customized dashboard, each bank could track its own activity against the threshold on an ongoing basis reflecting recent data, eliminating the lengthy uncertainty associated with the current evaluation methodology, which many banks have highlighted as the most important area for reform (figure 2). Importantly, the CRA database we have constructed confirms that the proposed retail lending metrics correlate well with past ratings of bank performance (figure 3). The specific thresholds that would establish a presumption of satisfactory performance could be informed by current evaluation procedures but need not be set at the same level, and public input will be important. The retail lending metrics would be tailored to the needs of the local community. This tailoring is not possible with a uniform benchmark that applies to all banks and all communities. The large differences between assessment areas illustrate the importance of tailoring thresholds. For example, in Morgan County, Ohio, LMI families are 49 percent of the population, compared with 31 percent in O'Brien County, Iowa (figure 4). We believe this tailored approach is empirically sound and avoids imposing arbitrary CRA performance measures on a bank and its community. In order to ensure it meets standards of safety and soundness, CRA lending must be evaluated in the context of the characteristics of the bank and its community. Additionally, the proposed retail lending metric would automatically adjust to changes in the business cycle. As many commenters noted in response to the ANPR, a uniform ratio that does not adjust with the local business cycle could provide too little incentive to make good loans during an expansion and incentives to make unsound loans during a downturn, which could be inconsistent with the safe and sound practices mandated by the CRA statute. Industry commenters also expressed concern that discretionary adjustments to the uniform metric are likely to lag behind the economic cycle and undermine the certainty a metric purports to provide. By contrast, the proposed retail lending metrics are calibrated to contemporaneous changes in market conditions, thereby reducing the risk of providing unsound incentives (figure 5). Finally, the proposed approach would continue to recognize local context in assessing a bank's CRA performance. If a bank receives the presumption of satisfactory by meeting or exceeding the thresholds, an examiner could consider performance context information, including the bank's responsiveness to the community's needs, in determining whether the bank's performance is outstanding at the assessment area level. Likewise, if a bank does not meet or exceed the thresholds, it would undergo a full examination, as it would currently, and could receive any level of rating, including possibly Outstanding, based on the full range of performance context considerations and clear qualitative criteria. The metrics would be designed to provide greater certainty, while avoiding rigidity. Retail Test—Evaluating Retail ServicesRetail services can be extremely important to LMI communities, although they do not easily lend themselves to consistent, comparable metrics. It makes sense to use qualitative criteria related to the responsiveness of a bank's products and services and its delivery systems, which stakeholders highlighted as being particularly important in LMI areas. In terms of delivery systems, we recognize the unique and important role that branches play in providing essential financial services to customers, particularly in underserved areas. Banks would be evaluated on their branch and ATM locations and how well they serve customers using online and mobile access channels. Providing a meaningful evaluation of all customer access channels is essential to ensuring that the CRA remains relevant as more banks adopt digital technology. Recognizing that branches are important community assets, the proposed retail service test would compare a bank's distribution of branches, including any openings or closures, to broader patterns of activity in the region. A recent report on branch access in rural areas found that just over 40 percent of rural counties lost bank branches between 2012 and 2017, with 39 rural communities being "deeply affected" by the loss of more than half of their bank branches.10In addition to the challenges associated with higher cost and less convenient access to banking services, community leaders described how branch closures diminished their access to important leadership from branch personnel that was important to their community's success. Community Development Test—Measuring Lending and InvestmentNext, let's turn to the community development test for large retail banks, as well as wholesale and limited-purpose banks. The establishment of a separate community development test reflects stakeholder feedback emphasizing that the value of community development finance is distinct and not directly comparable to retail activity. A separate test also allows for a broader area to be taken into account for purposes of community development relative to retail lending. Our analysis suggests there are a set of metrics that can be compared to appropriately tailored benchmarks to provide greater certainty regarding community development lending and investment. The proposed metric would aggregate loan and investment dollars that are originated or purchased during the evaluation period with the book value of all other community development loans and investments that are held on the bank's balance sheet (figure 6). Reflecting input from banks and community organizations that patient, committed funding has the greatest effect, this approach avoids the incentives under current practice to provide financing in the form of short-term renewable loans in order to receive CRA credit.11 The proposed test would compare the combined measure of a bank's community development financing relative to deposits in its local assessment area to a national average, set differently for rural and urban areas, and a local average in the bank's assessment area. The national comparator would be set differently for metropolitan statistical areas and rural areas to reflect the comparatively lower average levels of financial infrastructure in rural communities (figure 7). The use of a national rural/metro comparator in addition to an assessment area comparator is intended to avoid skewing incentives toward financially dense areas that are already hotly competitive and to reflect the value of community development in underserved areas. The use of these comparators would help provide consistency across evaluations and clarity regarding community development expectations for both banks and communities. It is also important to recognize that community development financing is often provided in areas that do not neatly fit within a bank's assessment area. Community development financing opportunities are not always easy for banks to identify and often depend on working with local nonprofits or governments to help identify projects and put together the complex financing required to bring them to fruition. Stakeholder feedback emphasized banks' unique advantages in evaluating community development projects in the states and territories where they operate and providing the smaller-scale, more complex, and often more impactful, investments overlooked by institutional investors. For this reason, and to encourage more activity in underserved areas, it makes sense to give consideration to all of a bank's community development activities in a state or territory where it has an assessment area.12 Banks want to know in advance that they will get the benefit of CRA consideration in order to invest the time and effort necessary to evaluate and structure community development loans and investments. For that reason, we are sympathetic to requests for a timely process by which banks can seek conditional examiner review of particular activities before making financial commitments, particularly for activities that revitalize and stabilize targeted areas. Our analysis suggests a community development finance metric along the lines outlined here will help to ensure greater predictability and consistency in achieving a Satisfactory rating. However, we also want to make sure that these metrics are supplemented with clear, qualitative standards to ensure that small-scale, high-impact community development activities are rewarded, along with a bank's responsiveness to local needs and priorities. Community Development Test—Evaluating ServicesIt is also important to evaluate services qualitatively at the assessment-area level as part of the overall community development test. Volunteer and other services provided by banks can provide meaningful support to communities whose value is unlikely to be adequately captured on a comparable basis using aggregative dollar value metrics. In areas with a low density of financial services, a bank officer on the board of local community organizations could provide considerable value to the community that is not accurately reflected by monetizing volunteer hours based on their compensation. TailoringThis approach to assessing CRA performance would tailor performance metrics to bank size and business strategy, as well as to local and cyclical conditions. The approach would tailor to banks' business models by establishing separate thresholds for substantially different lending products, such as mortgage loans and small business, small farm, and consumer loans, as well as separate retail lending and community development financing metrics. The proposed metrics would also be tailored for different bank sizes. This is facilitated in part by allowing very small banks to retain the current evaluation procedures and in part by creating a separate community development test that would apply only to large banks. Tailoring is also an important consideration in data collection and reporting requirements. The proposed retail lending approach is designed so that it can be implemented in significant part with data that are readily available. In designing the community development approach, we have been mindful of burden as we consider any additional data that might be required to implement certain metrics. Finally, as previously noted, the metrics are tailored for local conditions and cyclical considerations. The proposed threshold for each type of activity is calibrated to local conditions as they evolve over the cycle, and the community development finance metric uses an additional time-varying national rural or urban comparator. The Path AheadStaff across the Federal Reserve System have devoted substantial time and effort to engaging with the other banking agencies in the CRA reform process. The analysis, data, and proposals I have discussed today have all been shared in greater detail with our counterparts at the other banking agencies in an effort to forge a common approach. We were hopeful our proposed approach could be incorporated into the proposed rulemaking that was released last month in order to seek public comment on a range of options. Based on the best available data, we concluded that CRA metrics tailored to local conditions and the different sizes and business models of banks would best serve the credit needs of the communities that are at the heart of the statute. This tailored approach using targeted metrics also yielded more consistent and predictable overall ratings than any comprehensive uniform metric. Our analysis did not find a consistent relationship between CRA ratings and a uniform comprehensive ratio that adds together all of a bank's CRA-eligible activities in an area. Moreover, we want to be attentive to possible unintended consequences: Because a uniform comprehensive ratio would not reflect local conditions, which can vary greatly between communities and over the cycle, a bank could exert the same amount of effort in different areas or different points in the economic cycle with very different outcomes. We continue to believe that a strong common set of interagency standards is the best outcome. By sharing our work publicly, we hope to solicit public input on a broader set of options for reform and find a way toward interagency agreement on the best approach. The process of sharing the data and analysis informing regulatory proposals and seeking public feedback on them is critical to the regulatory process. Given that reforms to the CRA regulations are likely to set expectations for a few decades, it is more important to get the reforms done right than to do them quickly. That requires giving external stakeholders sufficient time and analysis to provide meaningful feedback on a range of options for modernizing the regulations. I will conclude by noting that the high level of engagement and commitment on the part of banks, community organizations, and other important stakeholders give me confidence that we will succeed in strengthening the CRA's core purpose of helping banks affirmatively meet the credit needs of their local LMI communities. 1. I want to express my appreciation to Carrie Johnson and Theresa Stark for assistance in preparing this text and to Theresa Stark for her dedication to strengthening the CRA throughout her service at the Federal Reserve Board. The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. See Richard Rothstein,The Color of Law: The Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America(New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2017). See "Mapping Inequality: Redlining in New Deal America" (2016), for a compilation of the maps and notes created by the federal Home Owners' Loan Corporation in the 1930s that designated areas considered too risky for mortgage lending and were used to determine eligibility for Federal Housing Administration guarantees.Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, "Community Development in Baltimore and A Few Observations on Community Reinvestment Act Modernization," (remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Community Development Gathering, Baltimore, Maryland, April 17, 2018).Return to text 4. In 2010, the three banking agencies held hearings on how to modernize the CRA regulations and subsequently issued revisions to the interagency guidance. In 2017, the agencies published additional findings on the CRA as part of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 2017 Joint Report to Congress, Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Review, March 2017. In 2018, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency published an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) asking for comments on a ratio-based approach to rating performance. The Federal Reserve reviewed the more than 1,500 comments on the ANPR and subsequently held about 30 outreach meetings with representatives of banks and community organizations, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia hosted a research symposium.Return to text 5. Lael Brainard, "Community Investment in Denver," (remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado, October 15, 2018).Return to text 6. Lael Brainard, "Strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act: What Are We Learning?" (remarks delivered at the Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, February 1, 2019).Return to text 7. Lael Brainard,"Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act," (remarks delivered at the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference Build.Community.Power, New York, New York, May 18, 2018).Return to text 8. The importance of constructing a consistent and comparable CRA database was a key theme at the Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia on February 1, 2019.Return to text 9. In order for the retail lending metrics to provide a meaningful evaluation, a bank would also need to meet a minimum percentage of retail loans in its local community relative to its deposits. The bank's ratio would be compared to a minimum activity threshold based on the performance of all reporting banks in that same assessment area, with the goal of screening out the lowest performers who would need to undergo a full review from an examiner. The minimum activity threshold would be calibrated for geographies and different market conditions over time.Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Perspectives from Main Street: Bank Branch Access in Rural Communities," (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2019).Return to text 11. Lael Brainard, "The Community Reinvestment Act: How Can We Preserve What Works and Make it Better?," remarks delivered at the 2019 Just Economy Conference, National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C., March 12, 2019.Return to text 12. Statewide activity outside of a bank's local assessment area would factor into its statewide community development rating, and regional activities would be considered at the institution level.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2020 Economic Forecast Breakfast, Home Builders Association of Greater Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri Few sectors are as central to the success of our economy and the lives of American families as housing. If we include the amount families spend on shelter each month as well as the construction of new houses and apartments, housing generates about 15 cents out of every dollar of economic activity. As homebuilders, you set the foundation that supports the work of architects, bankers, electricians, carpenters, plumbers, furniture makers, and many others. In our time together today, I'd like to discuss the outlook for housing at the national level and also look at the labor force and credit challenges facing your industry.1 Let me start with just a few words about the overall economic picture. I'm pleased to say that the U.S. economy is currently in a good place, and the baseline outlook of participants on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is for continued moderate growth in gross domestic product (GDP) over the next few years. Unemployment is the lowest it has been in 50 years, and FOMC participants expect it to remain low. Inflation has been muted and is expected to rise gradually to the FOMC's 2 percent objective. One of the most remarkable features of the current economic expansion has been the vitality and resilience of the U.S. job market. More than 22 million jobs have been created since the low point for employment at the end of the last downturn, and the pace of job gains has been amazingly consistent. Until this expansion, even in good times, scarcely a year went by without at least one month when payrolls shrank. Yet during the past 10 years, we haven't had a single month with a decline in the overall number of jobs. I should note that I would not necessarily consider a single month of job losses as saying much about the direction of the economy. But the unbroken string of job gains that we have experienced during this recovery highlights how our economy has kept humming along during this past decade, weathering the occasional lull. Let me also add here that, as good as the national numbers for the job market look, things seem even better here in the Kansas City area, where job growth has been steady and the unemployment rate has consistently run around 1 percentage point below the national average—at last count, it was 2.8 percent. Let me now turn to the main topic of my talk today. My colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve pay close attention to developments in the housing sector, in part because it has historically been such an important driver of economic growth. In the national economic data, the part of GDP that includes homebuilding activity is referred to as residential fixed investment. This measure summarizes a variety of housing-related activities, including spending on the construction of new single-family and multifamily structures, residential remodeling, real estate brokers' fees, and a few other smaller components. If we look at the growth of residential fixed investment in periods since World War II that are defined as economic expansions, we see that this broad category has increased at an average rate of around 7 percent per year, faster than the roughly 4 percent pace of GDP growth in those same periods. And, as many of you know from experience, the opposite is true as well—that housing activity tends to experience relatively large declines in economic downturns. In particular, residential fixed investment declined an average of about 15 percent annually during periods defined as recessions, compared with an average annual rate of decline in GDP of just 2 percent in those same periods. These numbers illustrate that residential fixed investment is particularly sensitive to where we are in the business cycle. The strong economy we are experiencing now has an obvious upside for the housing sector: A robust job market translates into higher incomes, greater confidence, and more people looking to buy a new home or considering whether to make a change from their current home. Yet even though the financial crisis and the bursting of the real estate bubble occurred more than a decade ago, all of us here are no doubt aware of the lasting imprint that those developments left on the housing market. On an annual basis, both new and existing home sales did not increase again until 2012, and they remained at modest levels for several years thereafter. Given the large and persistent inventory overhang of unsold homes in the aftermath of the crisis, the construction of new homes was also sluggish for many years into the recovery. Part of the weak recovery in the housing market during the first few years of this expansion can be traced to extremely tight mortgage credit conditions. Despite the fact that the Fed slashed interest rates and kept them low for many years, many households were underwater on their existing mortgages, with more owed on their housing than their homes were worth, while others were unable to obtain a loan to finance a new purchase. As a result, housing demand remained very weak for an extended period. Another factor that played a role in the slow housing recovery was the low rate of household formation, which dropped significantly during the recession and remained low for most of the following decade. Much of this drop was due to a larger share of young people continuing to live with their parents, though this is not unusual when the economy is weak and jobs are hard to find.2 In the past few years, though, we have seen some encouraging signs that the broader strength in the economy has eased these housing market headwinds. Along with ongoing improvements in households' balance sheet conditions, mortgage credit conditions appear to be less of a constraint for creditworthy borrowers. I should add that housing activity is also being supported by interest rates that remain quite low by historical standards, with the fixed rate charged on a 30-year mortgage now below 4 percent, substantially lower than the rates observed just before the last recession. As you well know, activity in the housing sector is highly sensitive to interest rates and other factors that have a powerful effect on the overall cost of owning a home. In addition, amid the strong job market of the past few years, we have seen a rise in the rate at which young adults are moving out of their family homes and forming households of their own. Even so, millions of young adults are still living with their parents who likely wouldn't have been before the crisis. While their reasons for doing so are probably varied, there is potential for many more individuals to shift back to forming new households. Although the effects may evolve slowly, the higher rate of household formation will eventually result in higher demand for housing and encourage further increases in homebuilding. Home sales have been rising in recent years, the percentage of homes that are vacant has been falling, and inventories of both new and existing homes for sale have drifted back down to relatively low levels. In fact, at this point, the residential real estate market is quite tight in some areas of the country and by enough that I have heard that the volume of home sales is being restricted by the low inventory of homes on the market. The most recent housing data have been encouraging: Both new and existing home sales moved up strongly in the second half of 2019, and traffic of prospective buyers in new homes for sale and expected sales within the next six months have approached all-time highs. Permits for new residential construction, which had been sluggish early last year, recently moved up to highs for this expansion. In all, the national indicators suggest a positive growth outlook for the housing sector over the next several quarters. Before I conclude, I'd like to address two challenges currently facing the housing sector. The first relates to the difficulties that some employers face, including homebuilders, in finding and retaining qualified and skilled workers. To provide some context, the national data show that the unemployment rate in the private construction industry is now well below the rate we observed in the early 2000s, a time when the housing market was booming. In addition, the ratio of job vacancies to unemployment in the construction industry—a measure of labor market strength—shot up to historic highs at the end of 2018, and it has remained near those levels. These indicators confirm what I have been hearing from construction industry employers during my visits to different parts of the country—it's extremely difficult to find and hire workers, skilled or otherwise. In response to these hiring-related challenges, we have seen a renewed and broad focus on workforce development initiatives by the public and private sector, a development we have followed closely at the Federal Reserve. I recently heard a very encouraging presentation from representatives of vocational training organizations about progress they are making in connecting young adults, students, and high school grads with skilled trades. I am hopeful that these efforts, along with a continued strong job market, will encourage more people to join—or, in some cases, rejoin—the construction trades. The second challenge I want to highlight relates to the declining presence of community banks in the consumer real estate mortgage market. As regulatory burdens have risen, many community banks have significantly scaled back their lending or exited the mortgage market altogether. These developments concern me for several reasons. Home mortgage lending has traditionally been a significant business for smaller banks, and the decline in this business threatens a part of the banking industry that plays a crucial role in communities. Bankers who are present and active in their communities know and understand their customers and the local market better than lenders outside the area. Because of their local knowledge and customer relationships, they are often more willing to help troubled borrowers work their way through difficult times. These two challenges notwithstanding, I remain optimistic about the outlook for housing. I expect construction to continue advancing to meet the underlying expansion in housing demand from population growth and the strong economy. In addition, low interest rates will continue to be a key factor supporting growth in housing activity. As reported in the latest Summary of Economic Projections, released in December, most FOMC participants see the current target range for the federal funds rate as likely to remain appropriate this year as long as incoming information remains broadly consistent with the economic outlook I described earlier. In closing, let me say that I would also appreciate hearing what is on your minds. As a policymaker, I particularly value opportunities to travel outside of Washington to hear your perspectives on the national and local economies. These conversations improve our work at the Fed by helping us make better-informed decisions. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, Aditya Aladangady, Laura Feiveson, and Andrew Paciorek (2019), "Living at Home Ain't Such a Drag (on Spending): Young Adults' Spending in and out of Their Parents' Home," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 5).Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York Thank you for the opportunity to join you bright and early on this January 2020 Thursday morning. As some of you may know, I am a longtime member of the Council on Foreign Relations and have attended and participated in many such events over the past 20 years, although I will point out that in my previous visits to the dais, I was in the somewhat less demanding position of asking the questions rather than answering them. I am really looking forward to this conversation, but I would like first to share with you some thoughts about the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy.1 The U.S. economy begins the year 2020 in a good place. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, inflation is close to our 2 percent objective, gross domestic product growth is solid, and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) baseline outlook is for a continuation of this performance in 2020.2At present, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price inflation is running somewhat below our 2 percent objective, but we project that, under appropriate monetary policy, inflation will rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective. Although the unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. We are not seeing any evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation. Committee projections for the U.S. economy are similar to our projections at this time one year ago, but over the course of 2019, the FOMC shifted the stance of U.S. monetary policy to offset some significant global growth headwinds and global disinflationary pressures. In 2019, sluggish growth abroad and global developments weighed on investment, exports, and manufacturing in the United States, although there are some indications that headwinds to global growth may be beginning to abate. U.S. inflation remains muted. Over the 12 months through November, PCE inflation was running at 1.5 percent, and core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is a better measure of underlying inflation, was running at 1.6 percent. Moreover, inflation expectations, those measured by both surveys and market prices, have moved lower and reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate. The shift in the stance of monetary policy that we undertook in 2019 was, I believe, well timed and has been providing support to the economy and helping to keep the U.S. outlook on track. I believe that monetary policy is in a good place and should continue to support sustained growth, a strong labor market, and inflation running close to our symmetric 2 percent objective. As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate. Looking ahead, monetary policy is not on a preset course. The Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis and will be monitoring the effects of our recent policy actions along with other information bearing on the outlook as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that, in the future, trigger a material reassessment of our outlook, we will respond accordingly. In January 2019, my FOMC colleagues and I affirmed that we aim to operate with an ample level of bank reserves in the U.S. financial system.3And in October, we announced and began to implement a program to address pressures in repurchase agreement (repo) markets that became evident in September.4To that end, we have been purchasing Treasury bills and conducting both overnight and term repurchase operations, and these efforts were successful in relieving pressures in the repo markets over the year-end. As we enter 2020, let me emphasize that we stand ready to adjust the details of this program as appropriate and in line with our goal, which is to keep the federal funds rate in the target range desired by the FOMC. As the minutes of the December FOMC meeting suggest, it may be appropriate to gradually transition away from active repo operations this year as Treasury bill purchases supply a larger base of reserves, though some repo might be needed at least through April, when tax payments will sharply reduce reserve levels. Finally, allow me to offer a few words about the FOMC review of the strategy, tools, and communication practices that we commenced in February 2019. This review—with public engagement unprecedented in scope for us—is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve. Through 14Fed Listensevents, including an academic conference in Chicago, we have been hearing a range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from representatives of consumer, labor, community, business, and other groups. We are drawing on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability. In July, we began discussing topics associated with the review at regularly scheduled FOMC meetings. We will continue reporting on our discussions in the minutes of FOMC meetings and will share our conclusions with the public when we conclude the review later this year.5 Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to the conversation and the question-and-answer session to follow. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the December 2019 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 10–11, 2019," press release, January 3.Return to text 3. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm. Also see the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm.Return to text 4. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191011a.htm.Return to text 5. Information about the review and the events associated with it is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.Return to text