Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation In light of the challenges arising from the coronavirus response, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve Board today announced two extensions to upcoming resolution plan deadlines. First, the agencies extended the submission date by 90 days, to September 29, 2020, for the resolution plans from Barclays, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, and UBS. These plans are required to remediate certain weaknesses—deemed "shortcomings"—previously identified by the agencies. And second, the agencies extended the submission date by 90 days, to September 29, 2021, for the targeted resolution plans from the large foreign and domestic banks in Category II and Category III of the agencies' large bank regulatory framework. Targeted resolution plans for the eight global systemically important banking organizations will remain due by July 1, 2021. The agencies will monitor conditions and may adjust this deadline if warranted. Resolution plans, commonly known as living wills, must describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. For foreign banks, resolution plans are focused on their U.S. operations. Resolution Plan Deadline Extension Firm List (PDF) 2021 Plan Extension Letter Template for 10 Firms (PDF) 2020 + 2021 Plan Extension Letter Template for Four Foreign Banks (PDF)
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the extraordinary steps the Federal Reserve has taken to address the challenges we are facing. I would like to begin by acknowledging the tragic loss and tremendous hardship that people are experiencing both here in the United States and around the world. The coronavirus outbreak is, first and foremost, a public health crisis, with the most important responses coming from those on the front lines in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, let me express our sincere gratitude to those individuals who put themselves at risk day after day in service to others and to our nation. The forceful measures that we, as a country, are taking to control the spread of the virus have substantially limited many kinds of economic activity. Many businesses remain closed, people have been advised to stay home, and basic social interactions have been greatly curtailed. People have put their lives and livelihoods on hold at significant economic and personal cost. All of us are affected, but the burdens are falling most heavily on those least able to carry them. It is worth remembering that the measures taken to contain the virus represent an investment in our individual and collective health. As a society, we should do everything we can to provide relief to those who are suffering for the public good. Available economic data for the current quarter show a sharp drop in output and an equally sharp rise in unemployment. By these measures and many others, the scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent and are significantly worse than any recession since World War II. Since the pandemic arrived in force just two months ago, more than 20 million people have lost their jobs, reversing nearly 10 years of job gains. This precipitous drop in economic activity has caused a level of pain that is hard to capture in words, as lives are upended amid great uncertainty about the future. In addition to the economic disruptions, the virus has created tremendous strains in some essential financial markets and impaired the flow of credit in the economy. The Federal Reserve's response to this extraordinary period has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote stability of the financial system. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time even as we recognize that these actions are only a part of a broader public-sector response. Congress's passage of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was critical in enabling the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department to establish many of the lending programs that I discuss below. In discussing the actions we have taken, I will begin with monetary policy. In March, we lowered our policy interest rate to near zero, and we expect to maintain interest rates at this level until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In addition to monetary policy, we took forceful measures in four areas: open market operations to restore market functioning; actions to improve liquidity conditions in short-term funding markets; programs in coordination with the Treasury Department to facilitate more directly the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments; and measures to allow and encourage banks to use their substantial capital and liquidity levels built up over the past decade to support the economy during this difficult time. Let me now turn to our open market operations and the circumstances that necessitated them. As tensions and uncertainty rose in mid-March, investors moved rapidly toward cash and shorter-term government securities, and the markets for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, or MBS, started to experience strains. These markets are critical to the overall functioning of the financial system and to the transmission of monetary policy to the broader economy. In response, the Federal Open Market Committee undertook purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning. With these purchases, market conditions improved substantially, and thus we have slowed our pace of purchases. While the primary purpose of these open market operations is to preserve smooth market functioning and effective policy transmission, the purchases will also foster more accommodative financial conditions. As a more adverse outlook for the economy associated with COVID-19 took hold, investors exhibited greater risk aversion and pulled away from longer-term and riskier assets as well as from some money market mutual funds. To help stabilize short-term funding markets, we lengthened the term and lowered the rate on discount window loans to depository institutions. The Board also established, with the approval of the Treasury Department, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) under our emergency lending authority in section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Under the PDCF, the Federal Reserve provides loans against good collateral to primary dealers that are critical intermediaries in short-term funding markets. Similar to the large-scale purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS I mentioned earlier, this facility helps restore normal market functioning. In addition, under section 13(3) and together with the Treasury Department, we set up the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, or CPFF, and the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or MMLF. Both of these facilities have equity provided by the Treasury Department to protect the Federal Reserve from losses. Indicators of market functioning in commercial paper and other short-term funding markets improved substantially and rapid outflows from prime and tax-exempt money market funds stopped after the announcement and implementation of these facilities. In mid-March, offshore U.S. dollar funding markets also came under stress. In response, the Federal Reserve and several other central banks announced the expansion and enhancement of dollar liquidity swap lines. In addition, the Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign monetary authorities. These actions helped stabilize global U.S. dollar funding markets, and they continue to support the smooth functioning of U.S. Treasury and other financial markets as well as U.S. economic conditions. As it became clear the pandemic would significantly disrupt economies across the world, markets for longer-term debt also faced strains. The cost of borrowing rose sharply for those issuing corporate bonds, municipal debt, and asset-backed securities (ABS) backed by consumer and small business loans. Effectively, creditworthy households, businesses, and state and local governments were unable to borrow at reasonable prices, which would have further reduced economic activity. In addition, small and medium-sized businesses that traditionally rely on bank lending faced large increases in their funding needs as they struggled with possible closure or substantially curtailed revenues. To support the longer-term, market-based financing that is critical to economic activity, the Federal Reserve took a number of bold steps. These steps were designed to ensure that credit would flow to borrowers and thus support economic activity. With credit protection provided by the Treasury Department, on March 23 the Board announced that it would support consumer and small business lending by establishing the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). The TALF will lend against ABS backed by newly issued auto loans, credit card loans, and other consumer and small business loans. In turn, these loans will support consumers seeking to obtain these important types of credit. The Federal Reserve also took action with the Treasury Department under section 13(3) to support the credit needs of large employers through the Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility. These facilities primarily purchase bonds issued by U.S. companies that were investment grade on March 22, 2020. By purchasing these bonds, the Federal Reserve is able to lower the borrowing costs for investment-grade companies and thus facilitate economic activity. The Federal Reserve is also preparing to launch the Main Street Lending Program, which is designed to provide loans to small and medium-sized businesses that were in good financial standing before the pandemic. Importantly, with these and other facilities that the Federal Reserve has not employed before, public input has been crucial in their development. For example, in response to comments received, we lowered the minimum loan size and raised the maximum loan size across the three lending facilities within the program; in addition, we expanded the size of firms allowed to borrow under the program to companies with up to 15,000 employees. These changes should help the program meet the needs of a wider range of employers that may need bridge financing to support their operations and the economic recovery. We will continue to adjust facilities as we learn more. To bolster the effectiveness of the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), the Federal Reserve is supplying liquidity to lenders backed by their PPP loans to small businesses. And to help state and local governments better manage cash flow pressures in order to continue to serve households and businesses in their communities, the Federal Reserve, together with the Treasury Department, established the Municipal Liquidity Facility under section 13(3) authority to purchase short-term debt directly from U.S. states, counties, cities, and certain multistate entities. The two corporate credit facilities, the Main Street Lending Program, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility all have equity provided by the Treasury Department to protect the Federal Reserve from losses. The passage of the CARES Act by Congress was critical in enabling the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department to establish these real economy emergency lending programs that have the capacity to make more than $2.6 trillion in loans. The tools that the Federal Reserve is using under its 13(3) authority are for times of emergency, such as the ones we have been living through. When economic and financial conditions improve, we will put these tools back in the toolbox. The final area where we took steps was in bank regulation. The Board made several adjustments, many temporary, to encourage banks to use their positions of strength to support households and businesses. Unlike the 2008 financial crisis, banks entered this period with substantial capital and liquidity buffers and improved risk-management and operational resiliency. As a result, they have been well positioned to cushion the financial shocks we are seeing. In contrast to the 2008 crisis when banks pulled back from lending and amplified the economic shock, in this instance they have greatly expanded loans to customers. Federal Reserve Board Vice Chair for Supervision Randal Quarles spoke to you about these topics last week. The Federal Reserve has been entrusted with an important mission, and we have taken unprecedented steps in very rapid fashion over the past few months. In doing so, we embrace our responsibility to the American people to be as transparent as possible. We are deeply committed to transparency, and recognize that the need for transparency is heightened when we are called upon to use our emergency powers. This is particularly the case when Congress appropriates taxpayer funds to back lending programs that the Fed administers. In connection with the CARES Act facilities—including the two corporate credit facilities, the Main Street Lending Program, the Municipal Liquidity Facility, and the TALF—we will be disclosing, on a monthly basis, names and details of participants in each facility; amounts borrowed and interest rate charged; and overall costs, revenues, and fees for each facility. Thank you, I'd be happy to take your questions.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) The coronavirus has left a devastating human and economic toll in its wake as it has spread around the globe. This is a worldwide public health crisis, and health-care workers have been the first responders, showing courage and determination and earning our lasting gratitude. So have the legions of other essential workers who put themselves at risk every day on our behalf. As a nation, we have temporarily withdrawn from many kinds of economic and social activity to help slow the spread of the virus. Some sectors of the economy have been effectively closed since mid-March. People have put their lives and livelihoods on hold, making enormous sacrifices to protect not just their own health and that of their loved ones, but also their neighbors and the broader community. While we are all affected, the burden has fallen most heavily on those least able to bear it. The scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent, significantly worse than any recession since World War II. We are seeing a severe decline in economic activity and in employment, and already the job gains of the past decade have been erased. Since the pandemic arrived in force just two months ago, more than 20 million people have lost their jobs. A Fed survey being released tomorrow reflects findings similar to many others: Among people who were working in February, almost 40 percent of those in households making less than $40,000 a year had lost a job in March.1This reversal of economic fortune has caused a level of pain that is hard to capture in words, as lives are upended amid great uncertainty about the future. This downturn is different from those that came before it. Earlier in the post– World War II period, recessions were sometimes linked to a cycle of high inflation followed by Fed tightening.2The lower inflation levels of recent decades have brought a series of long expansions, often accompanied by the buildup of imbalances over time—asset prices that reached unsupportable levels, for instance, or important sectors of the economy, such as housing, that boomed unsustainably. The current downturn is unique in that it is attributable to the virus and the steps taken to limit its fallout. This time, high inflation was not a problem. There was no economy-threatening bubble to pop and no unsustainable boom to bust. The virus is the cause, not the usual suspects—something worth keeping in mind as we respond. Today I will briefly discuss the measures taken so far to offset the economic effects of the virus, and the path ahead. Governments around the world have responded quickly with measures to support workers who have lost income and businesses that have either closed or seen a sharp drop in activity. The response here in the United States has been particularly swift and forceful. To date, Congress has provided roughly $2.9 trillion in fiscal support for households, businesses, health-care providers, and state and local governments—about 14 percent of gross domestic product. While the coronavirus economic shock appears to be the largest on record, the fiscal response has also been the fastest and largest response for any postwar downturn. At the Fed, we have also acted with unprecedented speed and force. After rapidly cutting the federal funds rate to close to zero, we took a wide array of additional measures to facilitate the flow of credit in the economy, which can be grouped into four areas. First, outright purchases of Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities to restore functionality in these critical markets. Second, liquidity and funding measures, including discount window measures, expanded swap lines with foreign central banks, and several facilities with Treasury backing to support smooth functioning in money markets. Third, with additional backing from the Treasury, facilities to more directly support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. And fourth, temporary regulatory adjustments to encourage and allow banks to expand their balance sheets to support their household and business customers. The Fed takes actions such as these only in extraordinary circumstances, like those we face today. For example, our authority to extend credit directly to private nonfinancial businesses and state and local governments exists only in "unusual and exigent circumstances" and with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury. When this crisis is behind us, we will put these emergency tools away. While the economic response has been both timely and appropriately large, it may not be the final chapter, given that the path ahead is both highly uncertain and subject to significant downside risks. Economic forecasts are uncertain in the best of times, and today the virus raises a new set of questions: How quickly and sustainably will it be brought under control? Can new outbreaks be avoided as social-distancing measures lapse? How long will it take for confidence to return and normal spending to resume? And what will be the scope and timing of new therapies, testing, or a vaccine? The answers to these questions will go a long way toward setting the timing and pace of the economic recovery. Since the answers are currently unknowable, policies will need to be ready to address a range of possible outcomes. The overall policy response to date has provided a measure of relief and stability, and will provide some support to the recovery when it comes. But the coronavirus crisis raises longer-term concerns as well. The record shows that deeper and longer recessions can leave behind lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy.3Avoidable household and business insolvencies can weigh on growth for years to come. Long stretches of unemployment can damage or end workers' careers as their skills lose value and professional networks dry up, and leave families in greater debt.4The loss of thousands of small- and medium-sized businesses across the country would destroy the life's work and family legacy of many business and community leaders and limit the strength of the recovery when it comes. These businesses are a principal source of job creation—something we will sorely need as people seek to return to work. A prolonged recession and weak recovery could also discourage business investment and expansion, further limiting the resurgence of jobs as well as the growth of capital stock and the pace of technological advancement. The result could be an extended period of low productivity growth and stagnant incomes. We ought to do what we can to avoid these outcomes, and that may require additional policy measures. At the Fed, we will continue to use our tools to their fullest until the crisis has passed and the economic recovery is well under way. Recall that the Fed has lending powers, not spending powers. A loan from a Fed facility can provide a bridge across temporary interruptions to liquidity, and those loans will help many borrowers get through the current crisis. But the recovery may take some time to gather momentum, and the passage of time can turn liquidity problems into solvency problems. Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery. This tradeoff is one for our elected representatives, who wield powers of taxation and spending. Thank you. I look forward to our discussion. ReferencesBlanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence H. Summers (1987). "Hysteresis in Unemployment,"European Economic Review,vol. 31 (February–March), pp. 288–95. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019),Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2018 (PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, May. Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter (2011). "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 1–72. Martin, Robert F., Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014). "Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?" IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12. ——— (2015). "Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1145. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015). "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 63 (May), pp. 71–109. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (1989). "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz (PDF)," in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989,vol. 4. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 121–84. 1.Board of Governors, 2019. Also see the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (forthcoming) and itsReport on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020(forthcoming).Return to text 2.Romer and Romer, 1989.Return to text 3.For example, see Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox, 2015; Blanchard and Summers, 1987; and Martin, Munyan, and Wilson, 2014, 2015.Return to text 4.Davis and Von Wachter, 2011.Return to text
The federal financial institution regulatory agencies today issued principles for offering small-dollar loans in a responsible manner to meet financial institutions customers' short-term credit needs. The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency recognize the important role that responsibly offered small-dollar loans can play in helping customers meet their ongoing needs for credit from temporary cash-flow imbalances, unexpected expenses, or income shortfalls, including during periods of economic stress, natural disasters, or other extraordinary circumstances such as the public health emergency created by COVID-19. The agencies are issuing the "Interagency Lending Principles for Offering Responsible Small-Dollar Loans" to encourage supervised banks, savings associations, and credit unions to offer responsible small-dollar loans to customers for consumer and small business purposes. A March 26 joint agencystatementencouraged banks, savings associations, and credit unions to offer responsible small-dollar loans to consumers and small businesses in response to COVID-19.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Office of the Comptroller of the Currency To support the flow of credit to households and businesses, the federal bank regulatory agencies today announced an interim final rule that modifies the agencies' Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) rule to support banking organizations' participation in the Federal Reserve's Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility and the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility. In particular, the interim final rule facilitates participation in these facilities by neutralizing the LCR impact associated with the non-recourse funding provided by these facilities. The rule does not otherwise alter the LCR or its calibration. The LCR rule requires large banks to hold a buffer of high-quality liquid assets so that they can meet their short-term liquidity needs. The two facilities were established by the Federal Reserve to support the economy in light of the disruptions caused by COVID-19. The rule is effective immediately and comments will be accepted for 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Liquidity Coverage Ratio Rule: Treatment of Certain Emergency Facilities Board Votes Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency Four federal financial regulatory agencies have approved a policy statement on allowances for credit losses. The statement will promote consistency in the interpretation and application of the Financial Accounting Standards Board's credit losses accounting standard, which introduces the current expected credit losses (CECL) methodology. The interagency policy statement describes the measurement of expected credit losses using the CECL methodology and updates concepts and practices detailed in existing supervisory guidance that remain applicable. The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency issued the interagency policy statement, which will be effective at the time of each institution's adoption of the credit losses accounting standard. The agencies also finalized interagency guidance on credit risk review systems. The guidance presents principles for establishing a system of independent, ongoing credit risk review in accordance with safety and soundness standards. Note: On April 21, 2023, theFederal Registernotice: Interagency Policy Statement on Allowances for Credit Losses (PDF) was updated to reflect a revised version. Federal Registernotice: Interagency Policy Statement on Allowances for Credit Losses (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Interagency Guidance on Credit Risk Review Systems (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday finalized a rule to extend by 18 months the initial compliance dates for certain parts of its single-counterparty credit limit rule. The extension, which is unchanged from the proposal, applies to the combined U.S. operations of foreign banks and provides additional time for foreign jurisdictions' implementation of the standard to become effective. In June 2018, the Board adopted a final single-counterparty credit rule to enhance financial stability by limiting the exposure that a large domestic or foreign bank can have to another counterparty. The rule applied those limits to both the intermediate holding company and combined U.S. operations of foreign banks, which includes any U.S. branches. For the limits applied to combined U.S. operations, a foreign bank could comply by certifying that it meets a similar rule or standard of its home country. Certain foreign jurisdictions remain in the process of finalizing their rules or standards. The extension allows additional time for foreign banks to comply with the Board's rule via certification with a similar home country rule or standard. All other parts of the Board's rule remain unchanged. Under the final rule, the largest foreign banks need to comply with the single-counterparty credit limit rule by July 1, 2021, whereas smaller foreign banks need to comply by January 1, 2022. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Single-Counterparty Credit Limits for Bank Holding Companies and Foreign Banking Organizations (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Prohibition and cease and desist order against Thomas P. Hinkebein, former President of Whitaker Bank, Inc., Lexington, Kentucky, for misappropriating bank property and funds. The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Crown Bankshares, Inc., Edina, MinnesotaWritten Agreement, dated June 22, 2012Terminated April 29, 2020 First Bankshares, Inc., Barboursville, West VirginiaWritten Agreement dated August 8, 2016Terminated April 30, 2020 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent prohibition against Aaron K. Hill and Jessica A. Hill, former employees of Evolve Bank & Trust, Memphis, Tennessee, for engaging in unsafe and unsound practices while running a loan production office. Consent prohibition against Matthew Curtis, former employee of Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, for grand theft and fraudulent use of identification information in connection with his lending activities. The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: First Flo Corporation, Florence, ColoradoWritten Agreement, dated July 16, 2009Terminated May 26, 2020 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Financial circumstances were generally positive for most adults at the end of 2019. However, the Federal Reserve Board's latestReport on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020, found that financial conditions changed dramatically for people who experienced job loss or reduced hours during March 2020 as the spread of COVID-19 intensified in the United States. The report draws from the Board's seventh annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which examines the economic well-being and financial lives of U.S. adults and their families. The 2019 survey of over 12,000 adults was conducted in October of last year, offering a picture of personal finances prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. To obtain updated information in the midst of closures and stay-at-home orders, a smaller supplemental survey of just over 1,000 adults was conducted from April 3 to April 6 of this year, focusing on labor market effects and households' overall financial circumstances at that time. In April 2020, fewer adults reported that they were at least doing okay financially than had been the case 6 months earlier. The April supplemental survey showed that 72 percent of adults were either "doing okay" financially (43 percent) or "living comfortably" (29 percent). This is down from the 75 percent of adults who were at least doing okay financially and the 36 percent who were living comfortably in the fall of 2019. "A clearer understanding of how families are coping with the changed economic landscape is vital as the Federal Reserve considers next steps to address fallout from the pandemic," said Governor Michelle W. Bowman. "The survey data show that early in the public health crisis, a larger fraction of Americans were facing financial hardship than in the fall of 2019." The declines in self-reported financial well-being were concentrated among those who lost a job or had their work hours cut. Among adults not experiencing a job loss or reduction in hours, 76 percent were at least okay financially in April, which is similar to the overall share of adults who reported being at least okay financially in the fall. Among those who experienced a job loss or hours reduction, however, 51 percent indicated that they were doing at least okay financially in April, whereas 48 percent were "finding it difficult to get by" or "just getting by." Thirteen percent of adults, representing 20 percent of people who had been working in February, reported that they lost a job or were furloughed in March or the beginning of April 2020. Another 6 percent of all adults saw their hours reduced or took unpaid leave. Taken together, 19 percent of all adults reported either losing a job or experiencing a reduction in work hours in March. Despite these widespread employment losses, some people took on new or additional employment in March. Seven percent of adults reported that they increased their hours worked or worked overtime. Many people who lost a job remained connected to their employer and expected to return to the same job eventually. Nine in 10 people who were furloughed or lost a job said that their employer indicated that they would return to their job at some point. In general, however, people were not told specifically when to expect to return to work. Seventy-seven percent said that their employer told them to expect to return, but did not give them a return date. Consistent with the employment declines in March, many people experienced income declines. Twenty-three percent of all adults, and 70 percent of those who lost a job or had their hours reduced, said their income in March was lower than in February. Income losses can affect people's ability to pay regular monthly bills. Eighty-one percent of adults said they could pay all the current month's bills in full in April, compared to 84 percent in the fourth quarter of 2019. Yet, the survey found far greater rates of difficulty among those experiencing employment disruptions. Sixty-four percent of adults who reported a job loss or reduction in hours expected to be able to pay all their bills in full in April, compared to 85 percent of those without an employment disruption. In addition to monitoring how households were faring near the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the report also highlights continuing financial concerns for many households that predated the public health crisis. Some of these financial challenges include the 25 percent of non-retired adults who lack retirement savings, the 18 percent of adults with outstanding debt from medical treatments, and the 3 percent of people who do not own their home who experienced an eviction in 2018 or 2019. Three in 10 adults in 2019 said they could not cover three months of expenses using their savings or borrowing in the case of a job loss, indicating that they were not prepared for the current financial challenges. Results from the full survey reflect financial conditions in late 2019 before the pandemic's onset, and results from the supplemental survey reflect financial conditions at the beginning of April 2020 and indicate the nature of families' experiences of financial conditions at that time. However, the financial repercussions from COVID-19 continue to evolve, and the Federal Reserve Board will continue to monitor the financial conditions of households. The report, downloadable data, and a video summarizing the survey's findings may be found at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955. Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020 (PDF) Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released its annual determination of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of financial companies as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The act prohibits a financial company from combining with another company if the resulting company's liabilities would exceed 10 percent of the aggregate consolidated liabilities of all financial companies. Effective July 1, 2020, aggregate consolidated liabilities equal $21,229,884,414,000. This number, which is the average of the year-end financial sector liabilities of the preceding two years, will be the measure of aggregate consolidated liabilities from July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021. Financial companies subject to the limit include insured depository institutions, bank holding companies, savings and loan holding companies, foreign banking organizations, and other companies that control insured depository institutions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Announcement of Financial Sector Liabilities (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between January 31, 2020, and February 14, 2020, and includes responses from banks that held approximately three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The February 2020 survey is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday published updates to the term sheet for the Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) to provide pricing and other information. The MLF, which was established under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary, will offer up to $500 billion in lending to states and municipalities to help manage cash flow stresses caused by the coronavirus pandemic. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Term Sheet: Municipal Liquidity Facility (PDF) Updated Term Sheet:Municipal Liquidity Facility Municipal Liquidity Facility: Frequently Asked Questions Appendix B: Municipal Liquidity Facility - Pricing Appendix Board Votes Municipal Liquidity Facility
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced additional information regarding borrower and collateral eligibility criteria for the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). The facility was announced on March 23 as part of an initiative to support the flow of credit to U.S. consumers and businesses. To help ensure that U.S. consumers and businesses remain able to access credit at affordable terms, TALF initially will make up to $100 billion of loans available. Also on Tuesday, the Board outlined the information it will publicly disclose for the TALF and the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) on a monthly basis. The Board will disclose the name of each participant in both facilities; the amounts borrowed, interest rate charged, and value of pledged collateral; and the overall costs, revenues, and fees for each facility. The disclosures are similar to those announced in April for the Board facilities that utilize CARES Act funds. "The Federal Reserve remains committed to providing the public and Congress with detailed information about our efforts to support households and businesses during this unprecedented time," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell. The Federal Reserve intends to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities to counter the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic and promote a swift recovery once the disruptions abate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Term Sheet: Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (PDF) Updated term sheet:Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility FAQs: Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Board Votes Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility
Governor Lael Brainard At “A Fed Listens Event: How Is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community?,” sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., (via webcast) This will be the 15thFed Listensevent the Federal Reserve has conducted over 16 months. We have listened to diverse voices from every type of community in every sector and every district of our country. This rich set of perspectives is helping bring alive for us the importance of the review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices led by Vice Chair Richard Clarida. We have heard that maximum employment is not captured in a single national average, it brings vital benefits, and it takes a very long time to arrive in many neighborhoods. We have heard that inflation matters: Households at different life stages and in different places are balancing the cost of living against their earnings, while businesses are balancing wages and other costs against their pricing power. We have heard that access to credit matters, and that it is important to use the full range of tools to support the economy. When we embarked on this listening journey, little did we know that our nation would experience the heartache and hardship associated with the COVID-19 pandemic—an emergency unprecedented in modern times. Last year, we heard from small businesses that were expanding their workforces and investing in their communities. Today, many of those same businesses are running low on cash reserves and struggling to make rent and payroll—especially those in consumer services, such as restaurants and retail. Last year, national unemployment had fallen to its lowest point in over five decades. Today, unemployment has surged to levels not seen since the Great Depression. Last year, historically challenged groups were gaining a foothold in the workforce, and employers were investing in training and loosening job eligibility requirements. Today, the fallout from the COVID pandemic has cruelly hit groups with thinner financial cushions the hardest—workers in the lowest quarter of earnings, people of color, low and moderate income communities, and women disproportionately employed in services jobs. As we think about how the Federal Reserve's tools and presence in communities around the country could best provide stability at this trying time and strong support for the recovery to come, we are turning again to many of the same voices we heard from earlier to learn how the COVID pandemic has affected your communities and what lies ahead. Fed Listens: How is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community? Fed ListensEvents
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meeting on April 29, 2020. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 28-29, 2020. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 28-29, 2020:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "A Fed Listens Event: How Is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community?," sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Good afternoon. I just want to say a few words of welcome and thank everyone for being here—albeit in much different circumstances than would otherwise be expected. We've held manyFed Listensevents over the past 16 months, and it's important to note that these conversations aren't just a nice way to talk to people from around the country, although they are that. What they provide—what you provide—is insight that we just can't get anywhere else. You add depth and definition to the flood of data that flows through the Fed each day. You give us perspective on the economic realities that don't show up on a spreadsheet. You help us see those complex sets of data that analyze the American economy through the eyes of the people, businesses, and communities that make up the American economy. And that information is very helpful to us as we make our policy decisions. So this is a valuable exercise for us. And an enjoyable one as well, so we truly do appreciate it on a number of levels. The Reserve Banks are also continuing to host conversations in communities across the country to help capture economic realities on the ground. We are in the midst of an economic downturn without modern precedent. It was sudden, and it is severe. It has already erased the job gains of the past decade and has inflicted acute pain across the country. And while the burden is widespread, it is not evenly spread. Those taking the brunt of the fallout are those least able to bear it. The pain of this downturn is compounded by the upending of normal life, along with great uncertainty about the future. In the best of times, predicting the path of the economy with any certainty is difficult. John Kenneth Galbraith famously said that economic forecasting exists to make astrology look respectable. We are now experiencing a whole new level of uncertainty, as questions only the virus can answer complicate the outlook. Policies that address the resumption of economic activity are the province of elected officials at all levels of government, in close consultation with public health and medical professionals. But all of us have our own decisions to make as well, and those decisions will depend on public confidence that it is again safe to undertake various activities. From an economic perspective, we hope to learn a lot from your experiences and from what you're hearing from your colleagues, customers, and communities: How they're coping with that uncertainty now, how they're thinking about a future that's harder to plan for, and what matters most as they navigate the path. The feedback we get from our community and business contacts has always been crucial in how we conduct monetary policy. In extraordinary times such as these, it takes on even greater importance. I want to thank you again for providing that insight and look forward to the conversation. Thank you. Fed Listens: How is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community? Fed ListensEvents
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced temporary changes to their supplementary leverage ratio rule. The temporary modifications will provide flexibility to certain depository institutions to expand their balance sheets in order to provide credit to households and businesses in light of the challenges arising from the coronavirus response. Issued by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the interim final rule permits depository institutions to choose to exclude U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the calculation of the supplementary leverage ratio. If a depository institution does change its supplementary leverage ratio calculation, it will be required to request approval from its primary federal banking regulator before making capital distributions, such as paying dividends to its parent company, as long as the exclusion is in effect. The agencies are providing this temporary exclusion to enable depository institutions to expand their balance sheets as appropriate to serve as financial intermediaries and serve their customers. The supplementary leverage ratio generally includes subsidiaries of bank holding companies with more than $250 billion in total consolidated assets. The rule requires them to hold a minimum ratio of 3 percent, measured against their total leverage exposure, with more stringent requirements for the largest and most systemic financial institutions. The change will be effective once the rule is published in theFederal Registerand will be in effect through March 31, 2021. Comments will be accepted for 45 days after publication in theFederal Register. The Board today also asked for feedback on additional questions relating to the interim final rule. Regulatory Capital Rule: Temporary Exclusion of U.S. Treasury Securities and Deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio for Depository Institutions Additional Questions on Regulatory Capital Rule: Temporary Exclusion of U.S. Treasury Securities and Deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio for Depository Institutions (PDF) Board Votes
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. The past two months have been a time of exceptional economic hardship. The Congress has displayed an extraordinary willingness to act, in concert and at speed, to address this hardship and its wide-ranging consequences. I appreciate your dedication to continuing our common work, as well as the chance to appear. Thereportaccompanying my testimony reviews supervisory and regulatory steps the Federal Reserve has taken to address the economic and financial challenges of the current economic contraction.1I do not plan to repeat those steps here, although I am happy to answer questions about them in detail. Instead, I will briefly outline the Federal Reserve's approach to supporting the nation's economy, maintaining the supply of credit, and reducing the economic impact of the various containment measures taken in response to public health concerns. This approach applies, not only to our efforts thus far, but also to the efforts that we—and the financial sector—will make to support households and businesses in the months ahead. It is worth a moment to acknowledge the profound effects of this crisis on the nation's financial system and economy. The measures adopted to contain the pandemic triggered a deep, abrupt, and global financial shock. Uncertainty cascaded across the financial system. Savers and investors, consumers and companies, took part in a flight to safety, seeking the stability of cash over the volatility of the markets. No port was safe from the storm that followed, visiting asset classes from commercial paper to Treasury securities. The strain it caused was widespread, as families and businesses struggled to pay their bills, meet their expenses, and sustain their daily lives. More than a decade ago, U.S. banking organizations faced a different crisis, in which their structural weaknesses catalyzed and compounded the ongoing stress. Twelve years of work—by Congress, financial institutions, and the regulatory agencies—went toward ensuring that this dynamic would not occur again. Reforms, and other measures taken by the industry, raised the quantity and quality of bank capital, so banks could withstand a severe downturn and continue lending. They established higher levels of liquidity, so banks could meet customer and counterparty demands. They required improvements in risk management, so banks could avoid unexpected losses lurking in their books. They improved operational resiliency, so banks could keep their doors open and their lights on after a shock. As a result, banks entered this crisis in a position of strength. Over the past two months, the Federal Reserve took more than 30 supervisory and regulatory actions to ensure financial institutions could use this strength to support consumers, households, and businesses.2 Because of these measures, and the strong foundations on which they were built, banking organizations are well-positioned to serve as a source of strength, not strain, in the current crisis. They have been able to lend to creditworthy firms, which were suddenly without access to capital markets, or which simply sought to keep more cash on hand. They have been able to absorb new deposits from households and businesses preparing for the difficult road ahead. They have been able to process a flood of transactions from investors responding to higher volatility. And as a conduit for official-sector support, they have helped stabilize the financial system and restore market function. The strain in financial markets has eased, thanks to the actions of Congress, Executive agencies, central banks, and other private and public institutions around the world. The profound economic disruption of the pandemic containment measures persists, and households and businesses are still deeply affected. Financial institutions now have an essential part to play in addressing that disruption—as a bridge between the start of this crisis and the completion of our economic recovery. There are many differences between the current crisis and the one we faced a decade ago. The most fundamental, however, is the origin of the stress. The year 2008 marked the peak of afinancialpanic—incubated in the financial sector, unleashed by volatility in financial markets, compounded by weaknesses in financial institutions, and carried to the real economy through financial channels. The uncertainty that fueled that panic was born in the financial system, and policies aimed at the financial system could address it directly. Today's uncertainty is different. The financial sector has felt its effects, and financial policy has helped limit the damage. However, its roots lie elsewhere and have burrowed deep into the marrow of the real economy. They are anchored in urgent questions with no ready answers: When will concern over the outbreak pass? What will the world look like when it does? How do we return to normal? None of us can answer these questions with certainty. But we can affirm our commitment to support those who bear the heaviest burdens of the current crisis, and to help them carry the load, by ensuring the banking sector is strong and resilient enough to address the nation's current economic needs. That system has shown resilience over the past two months. Banking organizations have used their capital buffers to support a sharp increase in lending, especially through the standing credit lines of their customers.8Deposits have increased faster still, a sign of confidence in bank safety.9Central banks and supervisors have worked collaboratively through the Financial Stability Board and other fora to coordinate their response. A first wave of acute financial stress has begun to ebb. The storm, however, is not over. Banking organizations must continue to work constructively with borrowers, offering them the flexibility to weather a hardship they could not expect and did not create. Banks must still manage the challenges of operating during a public health emergency. And ultimately, banking organizations can only be as robust as the economies they serve. As the response to these public health concerns continues to unfold, the strength of the U.S. financial sector will reflect and depend on the strength of the U.S. economy. That strength, in turn, will depend on the calibration and effectiveness of our public health response. We at the Federal Reserve are seeking to play our role responsibly and effectively. The tools we have are ones no country should ever hope to need; the hour of their use is one no country should ever hope to face. More may be required of us before the current crisis ends. We can only pledge to do what this moment demands. Thank you for your time. I look forward to answering your questions. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report, May 2020 (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2020).Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19." For a full list of Federal Reserve COVID-19 resources, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)."Return to text 3. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies provide additional information to encourage financial institutions to work with borrowers affected by COVID-19," news release, March 22, 2020 (revised April 7, 2020); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal agencies encourage banks, savings associations and credit unions to offer responsible small-dollar loans to consumers and small businesses affected by COVID-19," news release, March 26, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal agencies encourage mortgage servicers to work with struggling homeowners affected by COVID-19," April 3, 2020.Return to text 4. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Credit Union Administration, and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, "Federal banking agencies to defer appraisals and evaluations for real estate transactions affected by COVID-19," news release, April 14, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve offers regulatory reporting relief to small financial institutions affected by the coronavirus," news release, March 26, 2020.Return to text 5. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "SR 20-4 / CA 20-3: Supervisory Practices Regarding Financial Institutions Affected by Coronavirus," March 13, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve provides additional information to financial institutions on how its supervisory approach is adjusting in light of the coronavirus," news release, March 24, 2020, ; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies announce two actions to support lending to households and businesses," news release, March 27, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces it will delay by six months the effective date for its revised control framework," news release, March 31, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, SR 20-9: "Joint Statement on Interaction of the Regulatory Capital Rule: Revised Transition of the CECL Methodology for Allowances with Section 4014 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act," March 31, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board finalizes rule to extend by 18 months the initial compliance dates for certain parts of its single-counterparty credit limit rule," news release, May 1, 2020.Return to text 6. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal banking agencies provide banks additional flexibility to support households and businesses," March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces technical change to support the U.S. economy and allow banks to continue lending to creditworthy households and businesses," news release, March 23, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces temporary change to its supplementary leverage ratio rule to ease strains in the Treasury market resulting from the coronavirus and increase banking organizations' ability to provide credit to households and businesses," news release, April 1, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies announce changes to the community bank leverage ratio," news release, April 6, 2020.Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses," news release, March 15, 2020.Return to text 8. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States-H.8," updated May 1, 2020.Return to text 9.Id.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Virtual Roundtable Discussion, Committee on Financial Services, Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Financial Institutions, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, Chairman Meeks, Ranking Member Luetkemeyer, members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's roundtable. The past two months have been a time of exceptional economic hardship. The Congress has displayed an extraordinary willingness to act, in concert and at speed, to address this hardship and its wide-ranging consequences. I appreciate your dedication to continuing our common work. Thereportaccompanying my statement reviews supervisory and regulatory steps the Federal Reserve has taken to address the economic and financial challenges of the current economic contraction.1I do not plan to repeat those steps here, although I am happy to answer questions about them in detail. Instead, I will briefly outline the Federal Reserve's approach to supporting the nation's economy, maintaining the supply of credit, and reducing the economic impact of the various containment measures taken in response to public health concerns. This approach applies, not only to our efforts thus far, but also to the efforts that we—and the financial sector—will make to support households and businesses in the months ahead. It is worth a moment to acknowledge the profound effects of this crisis on the nation's financial system and economy. The measures adopted to contain the pandemic triggered a deep, abrupt, and global financial shock. Uncertainty cascaded across the financial system. Savers and investors, consumers and companies, took part in a flight to safety, seeking the stability of cash over the volatility of the markets. No port was safe from the storm that followed, visiting asset classes from commercial paper to Treasury securities. The strain it caused was widespread, as families and businesses struggled to pay their bills, meet their expenses, and sustain their daily lives. More than a decade ago, U.S. banking organizations faced a different crisis, in which their structural weaknesses catalyzed and compounded the ongoing stress. Twelve years of work—by Congress, financial institutions, and the regulatory agencies—went toward ensuring that this dynamic would not occur again. Reforms, and other measures taken by the industry, raised the quantity and quality of bank capital, so banks could withstand a severe downturn and continue lending. They established higher levels of liquidity, so banks could meet customer and counterparty demands. They required improvements in risk management, so banks could avoid unexpected losses lurking in their books. They improved operational resiliency, so banks could keep their doors open and their lights on after a shock. As a result, banks entered this crisis in a position of strength. Over the past two months, the Federal Reserve took more than 30 supervisory and regulatory actions to ensure financial institutions could use this strength to support consumers, households, and businesses.2 The Federal Reserve's efforts have applied to a range of financial institutions, including both Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) and minority depository institutions (MDIs), both of which are important to financing small businesses and community development in low- and moderate-income communities. To name one example, both CDFIs and MDIs are eligible to participate in our Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, which will help small business lending by the firms. Two weeks ago, we expanded the eligibility of this facility to include CDFI loan funds that are eligible lenders for the Paycheck Protection Program. We have conducted extensive outreach to both CDFIs and MDIs to better understand the challenges they—and the communities they serve—face in the current crisis and will continue to do so. Because of these measures, and the strong foundations on which they were built, banking organizations are well-positioned to serve as a source of strength, not strain, in the current crisis. They have been able to lend to creditworthy firms, which were suddenly without access to capital markets, or which simply sought to keep more cash on hand. They have been able to absorb new deposits from households and businesses preparing for the difficult road ahead. They have been able to process a flood of transactions from investors responding to higher volatility. And as a conduit for official-sector support, they have helped stabilize the financial system and restore market function. The strain in financial markets has eased, thanks to the actions of Congress, Executive agencies, central banks, and other private and public institutions around the world. The profound economic disruption of the pandemic containment measures persists, and households and businesses are still deeply affected. Financial institutions now have an essential part to play in addressing that disruption—as a bridge between the start of this crisis and the completion of our economic recovery. There are many differences between the current crisis and the one we faced a decade ago. The most fundamental, however, is the origin of the stress. The year 2008 marked the peak of afinancialpanic—incubated in the financial sector, unleashed by volatility in financial markets, compounded by weaknesses in financial institutions, and carried to the real economy through financial channels. The uncertainty that fueled that panic was born in the financial system, and policies aimed at the financial system could address it directly. Today's uncertainty is different. The financial sector has felt its effects, and financial policy has helped limit the damage. However, its roots lie elsewhere and have burrowed deep into the marrow of the real economy. They are anchored in urgent questions with no ready answers: When will concern over the outbreak pass? What will the world look like when it does? How do we return to normal? None of us can answer these questions with certainty. But we can affirm our commitment to support those who bear the heaviest burdens of the current crisis, and to help them carry the load, by ensuring the banking sector is strong and resilient enough to address the nation's current economic needs. That system has shown resilience over the past two months. Banking organizations have used their capital buffers to support a sharp increase in lending, especially through the standing credit lines of their customers.8Deposits have increased faster still, a sign of confidence in bank safety.9Central banks and supervisors have worked collaboratively through the Financial Stability Board and other fora to coordinate their response. A first wave of acute financial stress has begun to ebb. The storm, however, is not over. Banking organizations must continue to work constructively with borrowers, offering them the flexibility to weather a hardship they could not expect and did not create. Banks must still manage the challenges of operating during a public health emergency. And ultimately, banking organizations can only be as robust as the economies they serve. As the response to these public health concerns continues to unfold, the strength of the U.S. financial sector will reflect and depend on the strength of the U.S. economy. That strength, in turn, will depend on the calibration and effectiveness of our public health response. We at the Federal Reserve are seeking to play our role responsibly and effectively. The tools we have are ones no country should ever hope to need; the hour of their use is one no country should ever hope to face. More may be required of us before the current crisis ends. We can only pledge to do what this moment demands. Thank you for your time. I look forward to today's discussion. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report, May 2020 (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2020).Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19." For a full list of Federal Reserve COVID-19 resources, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)."Return to text 3. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies provide additional information to encourage financial institutions to work with borrowers affected by COVID-19," news release, March 22, 2020 (revised April 7, 2020); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal agencies encourage banks, savings associations and credit unions to offer responsible small-dollar loans to consumers and small businesses affected by COVID-19," news release, March 26, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal agencies encourage mortgage servicers to work with struggling homeowners affected by COVID-19," April 3, 2020.Return to text 4. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Credit Union Administration, and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, "Federal banking agencies to defer appraisals and evaluations for real estate transactions affected by COVID-19," news release, April 14, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve offers regulatory reporting relief to small financial institutions affected by the coronavirus," news release, March 26, 2020.Return to text 5. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "SR 20-4 / CA 20-3: Supervisory Practices Regarding Financial Institutions Affected by Coronavirus," March 13, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve provides additional information to financial institutions on how its supervisory approach is adjusting in light of the coronavirus," news release, March 24, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies announce two actions to support lending to households and businesses," news release, March 27; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces it will delay by six months the effective date for its revised control framework," news release, March 31, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, SR 20-9: "Joint Statement on Interaction of the Regulatory Capital Rule: Revised Transition of the CECL Methodology for Allowances with Section 4014 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act," March 31, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board finalizes rule to extend by 18 months the initial compliance dates for certain parts of its single-counterparty credit limit rule," news release, May 1, 2020.Return to text 6. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Federal banking agencies provide banks additional flexibility to support households and businesses," March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces technical change to support the U.S. economy and allow banks to continue lending to creditworthy households and businesses," news release, March 23, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces temporary change to its supplementary leverage ratio rule to ease strains in the Treasury market resulting from the coronavirus and increase banking organizations' ability to provide credit to households and businesses," news release, April 1, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies announce changes to the community bank leverage ratio," news release, April 6, 2020.Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses," news release, March 15, 2020.Return to text 8. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States-H.8," updated May 1, 2020.Return to text 9.Id.Return to text Virtual Roundtable: Update from Prudential Regulators
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, New York (via webcast) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the New York Association for Business Economics.1I have been looking forward to this session, and I am sorry that I cannot join you in person, as I always value my opportunities for dialogue with business and market economists. Since mid-March, along with my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleagues, I have been working from home. While I certainly miss the opportunities for face-to-face interactions along the corridors of the Board's Eccles Building, I am grateful to be able to work from home and want to convey my deep gratitude to all of those on the frontlines of the crisis, who are working outside the comfort of their homes in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities. Current Economic Situation and OutlookWhile the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has taken a tragic human toll measured in terms of lives lost and suffering inflicted, as a direct result of the necessary public health policies put in place to mitigate and control the spread of the virus, the pandemic has also inflicted a heavy toll on the levels of activity and employment in the U.S. economy. Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 4.8 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year and will almost surely continue to contract at an unprecedented pace in the second quarter. The unemployment rate, which was at a 50‑year low of 3.5 percent as recently as February, surged in April by more than 10 percentage points to 14.7 percent, an 80-year high, and it is likely to rise further in May. To put the numbers in some context, more jobs were lost in March and April of this year than had been created in the previous nine years. But while the economic news has been unremittingly awful in recent weeks, financial conditions since the middle of March have eased—and considerably so in many markets. I believe—and most outside observers agree—that this easing of financial conditions is, at least in part, a direct consequence of the actions the Federal Reserve took at our March 15 meeting, the subsequent announcements over the following days of the creation of nine new credit facilities to support the flow of credit to households and companies, the robust expansion of our existing foreign exchange swap arrangements with major foreign central banks, and the establishment of a new FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility with potential eligibility for a broad range of countries.2While this easing of financial conditions is, of course, welcome, whether it proves to be durable will depend importantly on the course that the coronavirus contagion takes and the duration of the downturn that it causes. At a minimum, the easing of financial conditions is buying some time until the economy can begin to recover, growth resumes, and unemployment begins to fall. As I speak to you today, there is extraordinary uncertainty about both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn. Because the course of the economy will depend on the course of the virus and the public health policies put in place to mitigate and contain it, there is an unusually wide range of scenarios for the evolution of the economy that could plausibly play out over the next several years. In my baseline view, while I do believe it will likely take some time for economic activity and the labor market to fully recover from the pandemic shock, I do project right now that the economy will begin to grow and that the unemployment rate will begin to decline starting in the second half of this year. In terms of inflation, my projection is for the COVID-19 contagion shock to be disinflationary, not inflationary, and the data we are seeing so far are consistent with this projection. For example, core CPI (consumer price inflation) prices fell 0.45 percent in April, the largest monthly decrease since the beginning of the series in 1957. While the COVID-19 shock is disrupting both aggregate demand and supply, the net effect, I believe, will be for aggregate demand to decline relative to aggregate supply, both in the near term and over the medium term. If so, this decrease will put downward pressure on core inflation, which was already running somewhat below our 2 percent objective when the downturn began in March. Moreover, as I have indicated previously, I judge that measures of longer-term inflation expectations were, when the downturn began, at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective. The Policy ResponseAt the Federal Reserve, we take our dual-mandate obligations of maximum employment and price stability very seriously, and, since March 3, we have deployed our entire toolkit to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time. In two unscheduled meetings, we voted on March 3 and 15 to cut the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points to its current range of 0 to 25 basis points. In our FOMC statements, we have indicated we expect to maintain the target range at this level until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. On March 16, we launched a program to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in whatever amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. To date, these purchases have totaled more than $2 trillion, and, as we indicated following our April FOMC meeting, they are continuing but at a reduced pace, reflecting the substantial improvement in market functioning that has occurred since the program was launched two months ago. Since March 17, the Federal Reserve Board has announced the establishment of no fewer than nine new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. These programs are authorized under emergency lending powers granted to the Fed under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and are available only in "unusual and exigent" circumstances and with the consent of the Secretary of Treasury.3I think you will agree that today we face circumstances that are both exigent and unusual. These facilities are supported with money invested by the Department of the Treasury, drawing on appropriations of more than $450 billion authorized by the Congress in the Cares Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) for the specific purpose of investing in Fed programs to sustain the flow of credit to households, firms, and communities during the coronavirus pandemic. With these facilities, we are providing a bridge by stepping in and supporting lending throughout the economy until the recovery takes hold. These programs are designed to offer backstop sources of funding to the private sector, and just the announcement that these backstop facilities would soon be launched appears to have bolstered confidence in capital markets, allowing many companies to finance themselves privately even before the facilities were up and running. But importantly, these are, after all, emergency facilities, and someday—hopefully soon—the emergency will pass. When that day comes and we are confident the economy is solidly on the road to recovery, we will wind down these lending facilities at such time as we determine the circumstances we confront are no longer unusual or exigent. Not only is the Federal Reserve using its full range of tools to support the economy through this challenging time, but our policies will also help ensure that the rebound in activity when it commences will be as robust as possible. That said, it is important to note that the Fed's statutory authority grants uslendingpowers, notspendingpowers. The Fed is not authorized to grant money to particular beneficiaries, to meet the payroll expenses of small businesses, or to underwrite the unemployment benefits of displaced workers. Programs to support such worthy goals reside squarely in the domain of fiscal policy. The Fed can only make loans to solvent entities with the expectation the loans will be paid back. Direct fiscal support for the economy is thus also essential to sustain economic activity and complement what monetary policy cannot accomplish on its own. Direct fiscal support can make a critical difference, not just in helping families and businesses stay afloat in a time of need, but also in sustaining the productive capacity of the economy after we emerge from this downturn. Fortunately, the fiscal policy response in the United States to the coronavirus shock has been both robust and timely. In four pieces of legislation passed in just over two months, the Congress has voted $2.9 trillion in coronavirus relief, about 14 percent of GDP. This total includes nearly $700 billion for the Paycheck Protection Program to support worker retention at small companies and more than $450 billion for the U.S. Treasury to provide first-loss equity funding for the Fed credit facilities that I discussed earlier. While the scale, scope, and timing of the monetary and fiscal policy responses to the coronavirus pandemic are unprecedented and will certainly cushion the blow the shock inflicts on the economy, the shock is severe. Depending on the course the virus takes and the depth and duration of the downturn it causes, additional support from both monetary and fiscal policies may be called for. Concluding RemarksThe coronavirus pandemic poses the most serious threat to maximum employment and, potentially, to price stability that the United States has faced in our lifetimes. There is much that policymakers—and epidemiologists—simply do not know right now about the potential course that the virus, and thus the economy, will take. But there is one thing that I am certain about: The Federal Reserve will continue to act forcefully, proactively, and aggressively as we deploy our toolkit—including our balance sheet, forward guidance, and lending facilities—to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time and to do all we can to make sure that the recovery from this downturn, once it commences, is as robust as possible. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Chiara Scotti of the Federal Reserve Board staff for her assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. For additional information on the Federal Reserve actions taken at the March 15 FOMC meeting, see the meeting statement, which is available (along with statements from other FOMC meetings) on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text More details about the new credit facilities, the expansion of foreign exchange swap arrangements, and the FIMA Repo Facility, as well as other regulatory actions, can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/covid-19.htm. 3. SeeFederal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. § 343 (1932), quoted text in paragraph 3.A.Return to text Discussion with Vice Chair Clarida on the U.S Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Governor Lael Brainard At the "Investment Connection – Response to COVID-19: Colorado" webinar series hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri Good afternoon everyone. I greatly appreciate this opportunity to participate in the virtual Investment Connection. As many of you are aware, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City started this initiative in 2011 with a goal of helping funders find community and economic development opportunities in the 10th District. Investment Connection has attracted a wide range of proposals to meet community development needs, including asset building and financial education, community facilities, small business development/microlending, neighborhood stabilization/affordable housing, and workforce development. Since its inception, seven additional Reserve Banks have held or plan to hold Investment Connection events in their respective districts. The COVID-19 pandemic has created an economic and public health crisis, which has caused tremendous hardship, in particular for our most vulnerable communities. The devastation is demanding that government, nonprofits, and other organizations think broadly and creatively to address the growing needs of households and businesses across the nation. The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) is a powerful tool to bring stakeholders together to find solutions that serve the needs of low- and moderate-income communities. As we collectively pursue efforts to address the challenges of this crisis, our work on CRA modernization also reminds us how critical it is to take into account the unique needs and opportunities in different communities. To better understand what is happening on the ground, and how the Federal Reserve can use its full range of tools to address this crisis, it is important to hear from direct service providers. That is why I join you here today. I would like to thank you for your commitment to meeting the needs of low- and moderate-income communities, especially in these extraordinary times. I am proud that the Federal Reserve has been supporting your work, and we are always open to hearing how we can continue to do so going forward.