The federal bank regulatory agencies announced on Tuesday that they will extend until October 18, 2021, the comment period onproposed guidancedesigned to help banking organizations manage risks associated with third-party relationships, including relationships with financial technology-focused entities. The proposed guidance is intended to assist banking organizations in identifying and addressing the risks associated with third-party relationships and responds to industry feedback requesting alignment among the agencies with respect to third-party risk management guidance. The agencies extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by September 17, 2021. Federal Registernotice (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Government Relations Council (GRC) meeting sponsored by The American Bankers Association, Washington, D.C. (virtual conference) IntroductionThank you to the American Bankers Association for inviting me to address this year's Government Relations Council meeting. Although we had all hoped that this meeting would be in person, we will have to settle for the opportunity to convene virtually once again. As we do so, I continue to reflect on the way the pandemic has transformed businesses and sectors of the economy, much as it has changed life for all of us. Unfortunately, some aspects of the way we live and interact may be significantly altered for some time. But focusing on today, I will share some of my perspectives about the impact of the pandemic on the community bank sector and the potential of technology to help meet the challenges of this new environment. The financial services industry has experienced rapid technological change over the past few years, and there is no sign that this change will slow any time soon. Innovative technologies were already driving greater efficiency and creating opportunities for banks and their customers before the onset of the pandemic. In the past year and a half, these trends have accelerated, and I expect this level of performance to establish a new threshold of industry expectation. Let's look at education as another example of an industry that has been transformed. We saw schools throughout the country quickly leverage technology to shift to online learning last year. Schools implemented innovative technology solutions to continue curriculum, and to creatively engage students and build virtual student-teacher relationships. While the implications of a period of prolonged online learning are not yet clear, technology enabled the expansion of the range of learning alternatives and essentially prevented the American education system from grinding to a halt. Some of these new tools will likely continue to be used even as in-person instruction returned this fall. We are seeing service providers in a variety of industries leverage technology to engage with their customers—from education, to retail shopping, to fitness training and beyond. In the banking industry, technology continues to encourage new ways of interacting with and serving customers that can help banks meet the needs and preferences of their customers and communities. Such innovation creates important opportunities for banks of all sizes and business models. As regulators, it is also important that we monitor how banks are adapting and evolving in response to these changes, and that we offer insights and clear expectations to help banks manage associated challenges. Broad Innovation ConsiderationsCommunity banks continue to play a vital role in supporting local communities. Their ability to thrive in an increasingly digital landscape is critical to the economic well-being of those communities. Through my regular engagement with community bank leaders, I do see innovation thriving. When banks can be agile in developing relationships with third-party providers to meet unique customer needs, they can find their own paths to innovation. For example, community banks approach the evolving payment needs of tech savvy customers from many different angles. Their solutions include partnering with financial technology (or fintech) companies, developing peer-to-peer payment solutions with their core providers, and even hiring outside developers to create their own apps that will best serve customers' needs. While positive trends in community bank innovation are encouraging, I am also attuned to the challenges community banks face when seeking to innovate. I have heard from many community bankers about the constraints they face in taking advantage of new technologies—both in terms of the resources and the expertise required to adopt innovative technologies in a responsible manner. The cost of conducting due diligence on prospective partners can be high for community banks already facing capacity constraints. Seeking a partnership with a newly established fintech company may introduce additional complications. For example, a less experienced partner may be able to offer a product that fits a community bank's needs but may not understand the bank's regulatory obligations or have fully developed operational or compliance frameworks. Gaps in the ability to demonstrate or guarantee compliance can introduce risk that a community bank will need to fully understand and ultimately to manage. In December 2020, I spoke about several initiatives being pursued by the Federal Reserve targeted at promoting access to innovation for community banks and overcoming related challenges. Today I am happy to provide updates and announcements about those initiatives. I hope that each provides additional clarity and serves as a valuable resource to community banks as they pursue their own innovation strategies. Community Bank/Fintech Partnership PaperThe first initiative is the publication of a paper highlighting some of the promising ways that community banks are partnering with fintech companies. It lays out some important issues that banks must consider to maximize the effectiveness of the partnership. This paper is the product of an extensive outreach effort with community banks, fintechs, and industry stakeholders. It involved discussions focused on the strategic and tactical decisions that support effective partnerships in a responsible manner. Community banks engage in a range of partnerships with fintechs, each pursued for different reasons, with varying levels of investment of time and resources. The paper describes key partnership types and the associated benefits, risks, and challenges that community banks experience with each type. The paper also identifies fundamental considerations for effective partnerships as described by community bankers. Some valuable insights emerged from our outreach, which may benefit community banks at various stages of the innovation process. Two important themes stood out: the first is establishing trust and aligning with fintech partners, and second, building a long-term culture committed to innovation. Let me elaborate on each of these themes. In our outreach, bankers noted that it is critical for partnerships to be built upon a foundation of mutual trust and alignment of values. In some cases, due diligence efforts reveal that potential partners do not share the banks' values or objectives. One bank, for example, began discussions with a fintech company that could assist it with the bank's Paycheck Protection Program loan originations by providing a customer-facing application portal. After learning that this partner intended to sell the small business customer information it would obtain, the bank opted out of the partnership. Instead, the bank looked to other fintech partners with values more closely aligned with its own. Harnessing the full potential of technology innovation also requires a long-term, strategic commitment to innovation. Many bankers spoke of the importance of knowing exactly what new technology is solving for, building a team they trust, and securing buy-in from both senior management and the staff responsible for implementation. Bankers who have forged successful partnerships don't innovate for the sake of being innovative but instead have a clear vision of their goals. For example, one bank partnered with a fintech company to roll out limited banking services to teenagers. Its intention was to promote financial literacy among young people in the community and to prepare the bank to accommodate the preferences of a new generation. The bank also hired local college students to work with staff, combining the technological expertise of these more recent hires with the deep compliance background of the bank's long-standing employees. Interagency Fintech Due Diligence GuideIn addition to the paper, the Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have recently published a vendor due diligence guide to assist community banks with their risk assessment when considering a new relationship with a fintech. I have often heard from community bankers that the manpower and other costs related to due diligence are formidable barriers for banks seeking to establish new third-party relationships. A recent survey of community banks confirms that burdens related to due diligence are indeed an impediment to new third-party relationships, including those with fintechs.1This guide was developed to help reduce these burdens by providing a practical resource for community banks when assessing the risks of potential fintech partnerships. This optional and customizable resource does not establish new regulatory expectations but it can serve as a starting point for banks in their due diligence process. A community bank can tailor how it uses the guide to meet its unique circumstances and the specific risk-management needs posed by each fintech relationship. A community bank can also share the guide with potential partners to help them understand the bank's risk-management requirements. Specifically, the guide contains relevant considerations, sources of information, and illustrative examples within six key areas of due diligence. These include, but, of course, are not limited to, business experience and qualifications, financial condition, and legal and regulatory compliance. I hope this guide will encourage responsible innovation that takes into account the range of potential risks of a partnership in addition to its potential benefits. Request for Comment on Interagency Third-Party Risk Management GuidanceWhile the Federal Reserve will continue to focus on developing resources for the community bank sector, it is also important to ensure that guidance is up to date, it supports the evolving range of partnerships, and it is consistent across all banking agencies. In July, the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC published for comment proposed guidance for banks managing the risks of third-party relationships, including those with fintechs. This guidance should reduce unnecessary burden by eliminating variation in supervisory views. It is also my hope that this guidance will better address the landscape of the third-party relationships that exist today. I am particularly interested in hearing from a wide range of community banks on whether the guidance is clear, helpful, and appropriately calibrated to address the risks associated with these arrangements. Use of Artificial IntelligenceThe final topic for my remarks today is the use of artificial intelligence (AI). Through clear, consistent supervisory guidance combined with useful tools and resources, supervisors can continue to support community banks in their efforts to navigate an increasingly complex world. In pursuit of this goal, in March of this year, the agencies published a request for information on financial institutions' use of artificial intelligence. As part of this request for information, the agencies sought details about banks' challenges in developing, adopting, and using this technology, including those challenges related to third-party services. While we are still reviewing and processing the feedback, initial reactions from Federal Reserve staff indicate that these responses are very helpful in our consideration of next steps. So, I would like to thank those who provided comments in response to the agencies' request, especially those pertaining to the use of artificial intelligence by community banks. Comment letters confirmed our understanding that at times community banks choose to engage with fintech partners and their models to tap into the benefits of AI. We have also heard loud and clear that acting on an interagency basis to ensure regulatory consistency is very important. As we consider the information collected and the potential next steps, I will encourage Federal Reserve staff to continue exploring opportunities to provide supervisory clarity on this topic and more generally to consider ways to help community banks innovate in the application of new technologies. ConclusionIn conclusion, I welcome comments and feedback not only on the resources the Federal Reserve and other agencies have published recently but also regarding additional resources that may be helpful for community banks as they continue to pursue access to innovation. And in the coming weeks, I look forward to participating in two upcoming innovation-focused programs oriented toward community banks. The Federal Reserve will host an "Ask the Fed" program later this fall focused on community banks and service providers, and the Board and the Kansas City Reserve Bank will jointly host an Innovation Office Hours event later this month. Frequent and continued engagement with bankers, fintechs, and other third parties has demonstrated the nuance, complexity, and many considerations involved in promoting community bank access to innovation. It is my sincere intention that the community bank/fintech partnership paper, the vendor due diligence guide, and proposed third-party, risk-management guidance serve as a foundation upon which the Federal Reserve will continue to build. 1. Conference of State Bank Supervisors,2020 CSBS National Survey of Community Banks(PDF), 2020 Research and Policy Conference.Return to text Community Bank Access to Innovation through Partnerships
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on September 30, 2021. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the measures we have taken to address the hardship wrought by the pandemic. Our health-care professionals continue to deliver our most important response, and we remain grateful for their service. Progress on vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. Since we last met, the economy has continued to strengthen. Real gross domestic product rose at a robust pace in the first half of the year, and growth is widely expected to continue at a strong pace in the second half. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in COVID-19 cases has slowed their recovery. Household spending rose at an especially rapid pace over the first half of the year but flattened out in July and August as spending softened in COVID-sensitive sectors. Additionally, in some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Demand for labor is very strong, and job gains averaged 750,000 per month over the past three months. In August, however, gains slowed markedly, with the slowdown concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic. The unemployment rate was 5.2 percent in August, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing fears of the virus, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should diminish with progress on containing the virus. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation is elevated and will likely remain so in coming months before moderating. As the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly due to supply bottlenecks in some sectors. These effects have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, but they will abate, and as they do, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer-run 2 percent goal. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown. As reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could again prove to be greater and more enduring than anticipated, posing upside risks to inflation. If sustained higher inflation were to become a serious concern, we would certainly respond and use our tools to ensure that inflation runs at levels that are consistent with our goal. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus, and risks to the outlook remain. The Delta variant has led to a surge in cases, causing significant human suffering and slowing the economic recovery. Continued progress on vaccinations would help support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed's policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. In response to the crisis, we took broad and forceful measures to support the flow of credit in the economy and to promote the stability of the financial system at the onset of the pandemic. Our actions, taken together, helped unlock more than $2 trillion of funding to support businesses large and small, nonprofits, and state and local governments between April and December of 2020. This, in turn, helped keep organizations from shuttering and put employers in a better position to keep workers on and to hire them back as the recovery continues. These programs have served as a backstop to key credit markets and helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending tools to an unprecedented extent. Our emergency lending tools require the approval of the Treasury and are available only in unusual and exigent circumstances, such as those brought on by the crisis. Many of these programs were supported by funding from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. Those facilities provided essential support through a very difficult year and are now closed. The Federal Reserve completed its sales of assets from the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility on August 31. We were able to wind down the facility rapidly and efficiently, with no adverse impact on credit conditions. The Federal Reserve also recently closed the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility to new lending, and the facility is now in runoff mode. Similarly, we are managing the paydown of assets in our other CARES Act facilities as they wind down over time. We continue to analyze the facilities' efficacy and to review the lessons learned. To conclude, our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do all we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. (Billions of dollars) Note: The data are current as of September 22, 2021. 1. The maximum authorized amount of facility asset purchases.Return to table 2. Current and peak outstanding amounts of facility asset purchases: 3. The amount of the Treasury contribution to the credit facilities.Source: For the amount of assets and Treasury equity remaining, see Federal Reserve Board (2021), Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks” (September 23),https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41; the peak amounts of assets for each facility are based on the H.4.1 from the start of the corresponding facility until September 22.Return to table 4. Treasury preferred equity of $13.9 billion was returned to the Treasury on September 24, 2021, as reflected in notices available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s public website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/secondary-market-corporate-credit-facility. This transaction will be reflected in the H.4.1 statistical release published on September 30, 2021.Return to table
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, Missouri (virtual conference) Good afternoon. I'm pleased to be able to join you again virtually for this year'sCommunity Banking in the 21st Centuryresearch and policy conference. Although I think we would all prefer to be together in person, in the shadow of the St. Louis Arch, I'm optimistic that next year (which will be the 10th anniversary of the conference, by the way) will give us the opportunity to finally gather in person after a two-year hiatus. For nine years, this conference, which brings together researchers, regulators, and community bankers, has enabled us to hear from top academics around the world who conduct research to help us better understand the community bank business model. It's not an accident that this conference is sponsored by three agencies involved in the supervision of banks—the Federal Reserve, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the FDIC—as the work of this conference has informed, and will continue to inform, how we think about the supervision of our nation's community banks. Our conference sponsors entered this partnership with the belief that what we learn here will deepen our understanding of the benefits of, and the challenges facing, the community bank business model, which, in turn, helps to make us better bank supervisors. It's natural then to ask: What have we learned from this conference that is applicable today? What might we apply in the future to the supervision of community banks? To answer that question, or quite frankly, to answer many questions that pertain to the regulation and supervision of banks, it's instructive to first go back a bit in history. In this case, I'd like to take you all the way back to...2019. Seems like a lifetime ago. Way back then, we were concerned about liquidity. Banks were concerned about a potential run-off of deposits as consumers found new, more technology-centric ways to manage their money, often outside of the insured banking system. Although we also saw a decline in technology costs that enabled banks of all sizes to offer a wider array of digital products and services to their customers, the innovation taking place outside the banking sector was often seen as outpacing the innovation in the banking sector. Consumers seemed to increasingly weigh convenience over safety, as a number of non-banks increased their market share. To a lesser degree, but still concerning, was that of the convenience factor. It drove some small business borrowers to move away from lenders with whom they had longstanding relationships. In some cases, those borrowers were even willing to pay much more for credit for the sake of convenience. Unfortunately, some borrowers learned the hard way that convenience does not always outweigh a banking relationship—particularly when a business or community experiences a significant hardship such as a natural disaster. I regularly heard stories of how small businesses that borrowed from an online lender were unable to reach anyone to discuss their situation during a crisis and ultimately had their loans called because of missing a payment. In these situations, I also heard stories of how the local community bank that understood the local situation and wanted to see the business and the community survive, would step in, and refinance the original loan to help the small business return to more normal operations. I also heard about challenges with core processors and how legacy contracts and a lack of competition for core processing services was stifling innovation. We saw several fintechs become "mainstream" nationally, and we saw a proliferation of technology solutions targeted at helping community banks become nimbler in adding new products and services. From a supervisory perspective, the Federal Reserve actively explored ways to reduce regulatory burden and provide greater transparency into the work of bank supervisors. Using research presented in prior years at this conference, we applied findings showing the disproportionate regulatory burden borne by our smallest institutions and looked across our processes to find ways to tailor our supervisory model to more accurately reflect the risk posed by these smaller financial institutions. And then came March 2020 and the arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. Despite the many choices consumers have for managing their money and purchases outside of the traditional banking system, we witnessed a systematic flight to the safety of FDIC-insured deposits in state or nationally chartered banks. Specifically, total deposits at all FDIC-insured institutions increased by 22 percent when comparing deposit data from 2019 to 2020.1Small business lending also increased significantly. From the end of 2019 to the end of the second quarter of 2020 alone, small loans to businesses at community banks, a proxy for small business lending, increased by 39 percent.2 The Impact of the PPP during the PandemicOne driver for the increase in small business lending was, of course, the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program or PPP. The PPP was funded by the U.S. Treasury Department through forgivable loans that enabled small businesses to maintain payroll, retain employees who may have been laid off in response to the social distancing protocols that went into effect in April 2020, or to cover other overhead costs. To support the PPP, the Federal Reserve provided a liquidity backstop to PPP lenders through its Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility or PPPLF. In recognition of the evolution in the banking landscape that I referenced a few moments ago, the PPPLF was designed to not only provide a liquidity backstop to banks and credit unions, but also to serve non-bank fintechs, community development financial institutions, and agricultural finance companies that participated in the PPP. Given the important role minority-owned banks play in the allocation of credit in their communities, the Federal Reserve also actively engaged minority depository institutions to ensure they had the tools they needed to benefit from the Fed's emergency liquidity programs. To be sure, the PPP and the PPPLF will provide significant research material for years to come. I understand from reviewing the papers accepted into this year's proceedings that it has already driven the work of several economists you'll be hearing from over this two-day conference. In reviewing the data on these programs, however—and here I must credit the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's "Supervision Transformational Trends" program—we see that a substantial majority of PPP loans, nearly 73 percent, were made by insured depository institutions. These loans also accounted for nearly 90 percent of the aggregated loan amount for all PPP loans. Getting a bit more granular, we can see that community banks made 32 percent of all PPP loans while large banks made 35 percent of all PPP loans, with credit unions and savings banks accounting for the rest of the loans made by banking institutions. Fintechs accounted for approximately 13 percent of all PPP loans and more than half of those were made as a result of a partner bank relationship. A recent working paper from the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) offers additional detail on the roles these different types of lenders played in allocating credit through the PPP during the pandemic.3The authors found From my perspective, these findings offer evidence of the continuing importance of community banks to our economy during both "normal" times as well as during times of extreme financial stress. Or, to paraphrase Mark Twain, "reports of the demise of community banks are greatly exaggerated." The NBER paper also highlights how new entrants to banking can meet an unmet need. The experiences of banks and bank supervisors during the pandemic also offer insights into how we should think about the Federal Reserve's approach to supervision in the future. For the remainder of my talk, I will offer my thoughts on a key principle that I believe should guide our thinking:The future of community banking and the future of banking supervision are deeply interconnected. My earlier comments should not be interpreted as suggesting that there aren't real challenges facing the community bank business model. But I am suggesting that new technologies, new entrants into banking, and changes in customer preferences that have led to predictions about the end of the community banking business model simply have not been substantiated. If anything, this conference has highlighted that the diversity in business models of small financial institutions is an essential part of our economy. There is strength in being small that enables institutions to know their customers on a much deeper level. Small financial institutions can quickly customize products and services to address their customers' needs and, in some cases, they can leverage the flexibility of their business models to take advantage of new business opportunities. This flexibility allows banks to maintain strong relationships with customers—particularly those customers who don't fit a "typical" borrower profile. It also explains why community banks have a long history of providing essential financial services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities across the country. During the pandemic, I personally began speaking to the leaders of the more than 650 state member community banks in the Federal Reserve's supervisory portfolio. The conversations to date have provided important regional insights and perspectives that can only be gleaned from leaders who know their markets and customers at a very deep level. While I heard that lobby traffic was down and that lending opportunities were not as robust as they once were, I mostly heard optimism. I heard that the value proposition of the traditional community bank was on full display in many communities, urban and rural. I heard that bank business customers needed bankers who truly knew them and their businesses, and who could work with them to provide the customized support they needed during that time of great uncertainty. As banks changed to meet the challenges of the pandemic, we asked ourselves at the Federal Reserve, do bank supervisors need to change? By necessity, the immediate answer, of course, was "yes." The Federal Reserve did so by pausing all on-site exams and using technology that enabled us to remotely supervise the safety and soundness of our institutions as well as monitor their compliance with relevant consumer compliance laws and regulations. To be sure, we adjusted our supervisory expectations accordingly based on the guidance we were providing banks. We also greatly expanded our outreach and engagement with financial institutions. We deployed the full range of communications tools that we've developed over many years to provide banks with real-time information on supervisory expectations as well as the emergency lending programs that were put in place to forestall any systematic deterioration in the health of our financial system. As evidenced by the continued strength of bank balance sheets and the general absence of bank failures during the pandemic, I think we can confidently say that the actions of banks, bank supervisors, and policymakers during the pandemic allowed us to avoid the challenges that plagued our banking system during 2008 financial crisis. The pandemic heightened our awareness of this important linkage between banking and supervision. Had we not tailored our supervisory approach during the pandemic, I believe the impact on our banks, our economy, and on consumers would have been much more severe. From the beginning, we worked closely with our federal and state counterparts—many of whom are represented at this conference—to develop a sense of joint action and to agree to work together in a holistic way. I knew from my experience as both a community banker and a state bank regulator, that we needed to avoid overreacting and instead approach supervision in a more measured way that allowed banks the flexibility to work with their customers. We needed to empower banks to manage those key relationships in their loan portfolios in a way that was beneficial to their customers without exposing the banks to risk. What we saw, as a result of this approach, is that the industry made responsible decisions that kept credit flowing throughout the pandemic and enabled businesses across the U.S. to continue operating. But the question remains: how should supervisors, and banking supervision itself, apply what we learned going forward? During the pandemic, we changed our supervisory approaches based on necessity, but now we need to look ahead and make sure that we're adjusting our supervisory model in ways that allow banks greater flexibility to innovate to compete in today's quickly evolving banking environment—without sacrificing important consumer protections or the health and safety of our banking system. The Future of SupervisionTo start, we must acknowledge the interconnectedness of the future of banking and the future of bank supervision. Supervision has to evolve because the banking industry is evolving. Available technology, analytical capabilities, and customer and workforce preferences are driving this evolution in how financial sector products and services are delivered. We recognize that our workforce, processes, and technology must align with these changes to ensure that an effective, transparent, and timely supervision program is maintained. Therefore, the Federal Reserve is embarking on an initiative to investigate the implications of these changes for the Federal Reserve's Supervision function.6 The goal of this initiative is to ensure our supervisory approaches accommodate a much broader range of activities while ensuring we don't create an unlevel playing field with unfair advantages, or unfair disadvantages, for some types of firms versus others. This will include investigating technology and innovative business practices that increase our agility and efficiency. Innovation is a way of life for banks, it should be for supervisors as well. But we must do this in a way that also preserves what we know works and what we learned can work during the pandemic. Before sharing my views on the underlying principles that need to guide our thinking on our future supervisory approaches, I'll first offer some thoughts on a few aspects of Federal Reserve supervision that I believe must be preserved even as we think expansively about the future: So, what will this new approach to supervision look like and what principles will guide us? When I spoke at this conference in 2019, I discussed a number of very practical problems that we needed to solve. These included understanding how technology, competition, regulation, and other factors drive industry consolidation, quantifying the benefits community banks provide to their communities, and defining the full economic effects a community bank has on its community.7 As we move forward with modernizing our supervisory approach, these questions remain at the forefront of our thinking. But, based on our experiences of the past few years, we also have a number of new questions that we'll need to address if we are to be successful. For example, what do banks see as the most transformative technological innovations that will drive changes to their business models? How do banking institutions prefer to interact with their supervisors, and what do they think makes for a successful relationship between the supervisor and the supervised? The factors that are identified through this initiative as having the greatest potential influence on future bank business models will vary based on several factors, including size, complexity, geography, staff capacity, and business strategy, but, taken together, they will give us important insights into how we, as bank supervisors, might need to evolve our supervisory practices as the bank business model evolves. And as we consider our own evolution in the face of these changes, we will need to ask ourselves: In the future, I look forward to sharing our progress on this initiative and providing specific examples of how our supervisory practices are evolving alongside those of the industry. Times of crisis, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, provide us a unique opportunity to see how our banking system operates under stress—and to see both the strengths of our current system of supervision as well as opportunities for improvement. The lessons we learned over the past 18 months, supported by research from this conference and from other sources, offer important lessons on how we can appropriately evolve our supervisory approaches. What we learn over the next two days from the researchers, policymakers, and community bankers presenting during this year's conference proceedings will factor into our overall thinking as we embark on this journey to modernize our supervisory practices and develop new supervisory approaches that can meet the needs of today, and the challenges of tomorrow. 1. FDIC Summary of Deposits (2019, 2020). Summary of Deposits is collected as of the second quarter each year.Return to text 2. Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income (Call Reports).Return to text 3. Isil Erel and Jack Liebersohn, "Does FinTech Substitute for Banks? Evidence from the Paycheck Protection Program," NBER Working Paper 27659 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2020).Return to text 4. It's important to note that the NBER paper uses $20 billion as the asset size threshold between large banks and small (community) banks. This is different than the $10 billion asset size threshold that was established via the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.Return to text 5. In this study, lending by Minority Depository Institutions and Community Development Financial Institutions is included in the lending data for small (community) banks.Return to text 6. The scope includes execution of safety and soundness and consumer compliance supervision, risk identification, and analytical activities. The scope excludes other System Supervision activities, such as training, applications, enforcement, and policymaking.Return to text 7. Michelle W. Bowman, "Advancing Our Understanding of Community Banking" (speech at the Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 1, 2019).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A., Turin, Italy and Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A. New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement, dated March 2, 2007 (PDF)Terminated August 31, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition against Brent HarnessFormer employee of Simmons Bank, Pine Bluff, ARUnauthorized transactions in a customer account The Board also announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: The Bank & Trust, S.S.B., Del Rio, TexasCease and Desist Order dated August 18, 2017 (PDF)Terminated September 17, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Note:On September 28, 2021, the location of Simmons Bank was corrected to Pine Bluff, AR.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition and civil money penalty against Bhushan BhangaleFormer institution-affiliated party of BNP Paribas, New York, New YorkReceipt of improper payments in connection with third-party services provided to institution Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
To support responsible innovation in the community banking sector, the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday published a paper describing the landscape of partnerships between community banks and fintech companies. The paper captures insights gathered from extensive outreach with community banks, fintechs, and other stakeholders. The outreach involved discussions focused on the strategic and tactical decisions that support effective partnerships. Federal Reserve Board Governor Michelle W. Bowman said, "This paper will be a valuable resource for community banks seeking to leverage the benefits of new technologies through partnerships with fintechs. As the paper underscores, it is vital that a community bank's strategic goals align with the fintech provider and that the bank develop a culture committed to ongoing innovation." For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Community Bank Access to Innovation through Partnerships
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Fed Listens: Perspectives on the Pandemic Recovery," sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Nearly three years after we started holding Fed Listens events around the country, the program has proved to be even more valuable than we could have imagined. Its original purpose was to elicit broad feedback as part of our monetary policy framework review. However, the Fed has long viewed community outreach as a vital part of our economic understanding, and these discussions have delivered such value that Fed Listens has evolved to join the other regular staples of our outreach work. These events enable us to hear directly from people on the ground, at the heart of the sectors and industries you represent, from communities across the country, to add tone, contour and greater depth to the nation's economic portrait. These insights are particularly valuable as we move through this challenging and precedent shattering period. The speed and intensity of this downturn – and the rapidity of the recovery in many areas – are without modern precedent. I am very glad you could all join us today to offer your thoughts, and I want to thank you on behalf of the entire Federal Reserve System for both your presence today and for your continued feedback and participation. Some of the issues you are confronting are shared across sectors, while others are unique to your fields. Most of you are contending with changed workplaces, from safety protocols whose half-lives are unclear to fundamental shifts in how your industries operate, in everything from feeding people to how movies are released. Business plans have been reworked, outlooks have been revised, and the future continues to be tinged with uncertainty. While uncertainty often results in immobility for businesses, it can also spell opportunity, and the creativity and adaptability on display over the past 18 months have been among the few bright spots. I have been amazed and inspired by the flexibility and ingenuity, particularly that of small businesses, in shifting to meet the demands of a new reality. All of us are very much looking forward to the discussion today. You provide a wealth of information by sharing your experiences and those of your colleagues, customers, and communities. That has always been crucial in how we conduct monetary policy but means even more in extraordinary times such as these. I want to thank you again for providing that insight and look forward to the conversation.
Governor Lael Brainard At "Shocks, Shifts, and the Emerging Economic Landscape" 2021 Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Arlington, Virginia It is a great honor to join the community of NABE Fellows, and I want to express my appreciation to the Board of Directors of NABE.1 Given the unprecedented nature of the pandemic shock, it should be no surprise that the recovery is not proceeding in a straight line. The economy continues to make welcome progress, but the Delta variant has been more disruptive than initially expected. The headwinds from Delta are a reminder that the virus continues to pose downside risks to the outlook. Delta highlights the importance of being attentive to economic outcomes and not getting too attached to an outlook that may get buffeted by evolving virus conditions. Indeed, Delta disrupted both demand and supply. Many forecasters have downgraded consumer spending in the second half of the year, as Delta has limited the acceleration in services spending that had been anticipated to help offset the drag on activity from fiscal support shifting from being a tailwind to a headwind. Although the retail sales print for August was stronger than expected, the level of spending in August was not much changed from June. High-frequency data indicate that consumption of discretionary services, such as restaurants and travel, stalled or may have even moved lower in some categories since July. This development doesn't appear to be sensitive to regional variations in vaccinations, perhaps reflecting the high transmissibility of Delta. For example, the consumption of food services has declined recently even in states with relatively high vaccination rates and low case counts.2 Delta has also prolonged supply bottlenecks. Single-family home construction permits declined again in August for the third consecutive month despite very strong housing demand, as builders faced shortages of materials. Auto production was paused at a number of North American plants in early September following COVID-induced shutdowns of semiconductor production in Malaysia and Vietnam. Industry contacts have highlighted the unusually low elasticity of global shipping such that COVID-induced port closures in China ripple through the interdependencies in shipping supply chains and magnify backlogs. All told, private sector forecasters have revised down growth projections for 2021 over recent months by slightly more than 1 percentage point on average.3Even with this Delta downgrade, I anticipate that growth this year and next will be sufficient such that by the end of next year, average annual growth since the onset of the crisis should exceed pre-crisis trend growth.4The strength of the recovery despite the unprecedented challenges associated with COVID reflects powerful fiscal and monetary support and the resilience of American workers, businesses, and households. Delta has also slowed progress on employment. Payroll gains in leisure and hospitality unexpectedly fell to zero in August following average monthly gains of 375,000 over the previous three months. Delta-induced spending declines for travel, recreation, and other discretionary services likely reduced the intensity with which employers in these industries sought new hires. The data reported by "Indeed" show job openings moving sideways from July through August before edging up again in early September. Similarly, the number of households reporting in the Current Population Survey that they were unable to work because their employer closed or lost business due to COVID ticked up in August after falling significantly through July. As of the end of August, payroll employment remains over 5 million below pre-COVID levels and nearly 8-1/2 million below where it would have been in the absence of COVID. Roughly one-third of the gap to pre-COVID employment levels is concentrated in the frontline leisure and hospitality sector. While the headline unemployment rate declined to 5.2 percent in August, the unemployment rate adjusted for COVID-related nonparticipation remained elevated at 7.5 percent.5The employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio for prime-age workers stood at 78 percent in August—2.4 percentage points below its pre-COVID level.6 So overall, the labor market is making progress, although at a slower pace than earlier in the year.7Relative to December, payrolls have closed nearly 50 percent of their gap to pre-COVID levels and the prime-age EPOP ratio has closed around 40 percent of the gap to pre-COVID conditions.8 In contrast, the labor force participation rate of 61.7 percent in August has shown little progress so far. Some observers argue that labor force participation has moved permanently lower, and the labor market is already tight, such that we should not expect a return to pre-COVID employment conditions. But the decline in labor force participation appears to reflect COVID-related constraints that have been prolonged by Delta rather than permanent structural changes in the economy. For instance, the number of respondents to the Census Household Pulse Survey indicating they were not working due to either being sick with COVID or caring for someone sick with COVID more than doubled between late July and early September, returning to levels seen early this year.9 While I am hopeful for improvements in the September employment report with the return to in-person education, the effects of Delta have likely prolonged caregiving constraints. For example, through last week there had been just over 2,000 school closures for COVID across nearly 470 school districts in 39 states.10,*While the disruptions last just under six days on average, the possibility of further unpredictable disruptions could cause some parents to delay their plans to return to the labor force. Similarly, COVID-related challenges have reduced the availability of day care, preschool, and after-school care, further complicating parental return-to-work decisions.11Research has shown that the pandemic has taken a significant toll on the labor market status of many mothers, particularly Black and Hispanic mothers, mothers with younger children, and mothers with lower incomes.12 With record-high job openings and an unemployment rate just above 5 percent, the headline vacancy-to-unemployed (V/U) ratio has risen above 1 vacancy per job seeker and is now at pre-pandemic levels. Some cite this ratio of job openings to job seekers as indicating we are close to full employment. But virus conditions may be driving an important wedge between labor supply in the near term relative to the medium term. It is instructive to consider the period 2017 to 2019 when the V/U ratio remained in a tight range around a value of 1.2, similar to its July value. Although prime-age unemployment declined by less than half a percentage point over this period, that modest decline was accompanied by a 2 million increase in the prime-age labor force, which raised the prime-age EPOP ratio about 1-1/2 percentage points. So, the headline V/U ratio may not be as informative when there are substantial lags in the recovery of labor force participation. Lagging participation is likely to be particularly important currently, in the presence of COVID constraints such as fears of contracting the virus and caregiving responsibilities. While these constraints have been prolonged by the Delta variant, they are not permanent or structural. Therefore, it is more informative to rely on a V/U ratio that adjusts the unemployment rate for pandemic-related nonparticipation and misclassification. After adjusting for pandemic-related nonparticipation, the ratio of job openings to job seekers was about 0.85 in July—nearly one-third below the headline ratio—and similar to levels last seen between 2014 and 2016—suggesting there is ample room for a full recovery in employment.13 The assertion that labor force participation has moved permanently lower as a result of a downturn is not new. Indeed, it has been a regular feature of the early stages of recent recoveries. Research demonstrates that the labor force participation rate cycle lags that of the unemployment rate by years. So, it is important to consider indicators beyond the headline unemployment rate when assessing progress toward maximum employment, as participation gains might come late in the recovery for some groups.14For these reasons, I see no reason employment should not reach levels as strong or stronger than before the pandemic. Next let's consider price stability. Inflation is currently elevated. This is creating challenges for consumers and businesses alike. But the high inflation readings from the spring and early summer were disproportionately driven by a few sectors experiencing specific supply bottlenecks. In May and June, new and used vehicle prices accounted for half of the outsized monthly increases in core consumer price index (CPI) inflation. These categories were lesser contributors in July, and in the August CPI their joint contribution declined to essentially zero, as prices finally began to retreat for used cars, offsetting increases in new car prices. I am closely monitoring incoming data for any indications that the breadth of inflation pressures is rising. Twenty-four-month core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation provides one approach to smoothing through the distortions from the pandemic: It is estimated to have been 2.5 percent in August, above the 2 percent target, but well below the 12-month measure. The Dallas trimmed mean inflation measure provides another indicator of the breadth of inflation pressures: It came in at 2.0 percent in July—well below the 12-month measure of core PCE inflation.15 The currently elevated level of inflation is driven by COVID-related disruptions. As these COVID-related disruptions subside, most forecasters expect inflation to move back down toward the Federal Reserve's 2 percent long-run objective on its own. That is the sense in which currently high inflation is likely to be transitory. In that regard, the August monthly CPI reading was the first month with a notable retrenchment among COVID-sensitive categories like hotels, used cars, and rental cars. So, I expect inflation to decelerate, and pre-COVID inflation dynamics to return when COVID disruptions dissipate. But with Delta disrupting the rotation from goods to services and prolonging supply bottlenecks, it is uncertain just how fast and how much inflation will decelerate over the remainder of the year and into next year. Therefore, I am monitoring a few upside risks closely. First, while rent and owners' equivalent rent both rose a moderate 0.3 percent in the August CPI data, if housing services inflation moved up substantially more than expected, it could provide durable upward pressure on inflation. Second, there is a risk that goods prices may not decelerate and return to pre-COVID trends as is widely expected, for instance, if excess savings or disruptions to services result in persistently elevated goods demand. Third, I will be watching for any signs that wage gains are feeding into higher inflation more broadly, but the evidence so far suggests that wage gains are broadly in line with productivity growth, and the labor share of income remains low relative to historical levels. To date, high markups and non-wage input costs appear to be more notable contributors to inflation than wage pressures. Finally, I am vigilant for any signs that the current high level of inflation might push longer-term inflation expectations above levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective. Market-based measures of inflation compensation suggest inflation expectations remain well anchored. For instance, the five-year, five-year-forward CPI inflation compensation measure based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities has remained range bound around 2.2 percent since declining about 0.2 percentage point in June—consistent with the FOMC's 2 percent objective for PCE inflation.16 Survey-based measures also suggest longer-run expectations remain well anchored. Recent analysis of the Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE) concludes that "in August 2021 consumers' five-year ahead inflation expectations were as well anchored as they were two years ago, before the start of the pandemic."17Longer-term inflation expectations in the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers have moved mostly sideways in the past four to five months, and the current reading of the Federal Reserve Board index of common inflation expectations remains well within the range that prevailed before 2014. While one-year ahead measures in the SCE and the Michigan survey have seen large increases, these short-term measures tend to move with consumers' experience of contemporaneous inflation. So what do these developments imply for the path ahead? One clear lesson is that we need to be humble about our ability to correctly anticipate future economic conditions given the unpredictability of the virus. We had expected a smooth rotation from goods spending to services spending during a complete reopening this fall, but Delta has slowed this process. Partly as a result, employment gains flatlined in August in the leisure and hospitality sector, where many of the job losses have occurred. As a result of Delta, the September labor report may be weaker and less informative of underlying economic momentum than I had hoped. Payroll employment is now between 5 and 8-1/2 million short of where it would be in the absence of the pandemic. The unemployment rate adjusted for pandemic-related nonparticipation is 7.5 percent. Employment is still a bit short of the mark on what I consider to be substantial further progress. But if progress continues as I hope, it may soon meet the mark. While inflation has been well above target for the past six months, affecting consumers and businesses alike, it previously spent roughly a quarter century below 2 percent. There are good reasons to expect a return to pre-COVID inflation dynamics due to the underlying structural features of a relatively flat Phillips curve, low equilibrium interest rates, and low underlying trend inflation. While the playbook for guiding inflation back down to target following a moderate overshoot is well tested and effective, experience suggests it is difficult to guide inflation up to target from below. Once COVID constraints recede, I see no reason the labor market should not be as strong or stronger than it was pre-pandemic. The forward guidance on maximum employment and average inflation sets a much higher bar for the liftoff of the policy rate than for slowing the pace of asset purchases. I would emphasize that no signal about the timing of liftoff should be taken from any decision to announce a slowing of asset purchases. We have learned this summer that it is important to remain highly attentive to the data and to avoid placing too much weight on an outlook that remains highly uncertain. In implementing policy step by step, we must remain faithful to our new framework and attentive to changing conditions in order to ensure sufficient momentum as fiscal tailwinds shift to headwinds to achieve our maximum employment and inflation goals. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Reflecting these trends, consumer confidence declined in the Michigan and Conference Board surveys in August. For more information on the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, seehttps://data.sca.isr.umich.edu/survey-info.php. For more information on the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey, see https://conference-board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm.Return to text 3. For example, between the June and September publications of the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey, the consensus estimate for real GDP growth in 2021 fell from 6.7 percent to 5.9 percent. Wolters Kluwer (2021),Blue Chip Economic Indicators,vol. 46 (June 11 and September 13), via Haver Analytics, https://www.haver.com/our_data.html. This decline is similar to the revision in the median of FOMC participants' projections in the June and September Summary of Economic Projections.Return to text 4. The median real GDP Q4/Q4 growth rates in the SEP of 5.9 percent for 2021 and 3.8 percent for 2022 imply an annualized growth rate from the fourth quarter of 2019 through the fourth quarter of 2022 of 2.4 percent, above the median SEP estimate of the long-run real GDP growth rate of 1.8 percent and above the top of the interquartile range of estimates from the most recent Survey of Primary Dealers by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2021),Responses to Survey of Primary Dealers(PDF)(New York: FRBNY, July).Return to text 5. This alternative measure adjusts for the misclassification of some unemployed workers as employed but not at work (as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) and for diminished labor force participation induced by the pandemic (as estimated by the Federal Reserve Board staff). Like the U-3 unemployment rate provided by the BLS, the adjusted rate is also at a post-pandemic low. This broader measure of labor market slack encompasses 12.8 million individuals in July 2021, as compared with the official 8.7 million unemployed workers reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 6. While the EPOP ratio has shown little net progress since April for white prime-age individuals, the EPOP ratios for prime-age Black and Hispanic workers have remained well below that of white individuals but have seen more consistent improvement in recent months, including a strong 0.7 percentage point improvement for Black individuals in August.Return to text 7. See Lael Brainard (2021), "Assessing Progress as the Economy Moves from Reopening to Recovery," speech delivered at "Rebuilding the Post-Pandemic Economy," 2021 Annual Meeting of the Aspen Economic Strategy Group, Aspen, Colo., July 30.Return to text 8. The gap of payroll employment to pre-COVID trends is the gap between the current level of payroll employment and the level that would have occurred had total nonfarm payrolls grown at a constant rate of 168,000 per month (the average growth rate in 2019) beginning in March 2020. The references in this paragraph to percentages of gaps closed describe the fraction that remains in the current data of the difference between pre-COVID conditions and the conditions that existed in December 2020. For example, the unemployment rate was 3.5 percent in February 2020 and 6.7 percent in December 2020, a gap of 3.2 percentage points. In August, the unemployment rate was 5.2 percent, implying a gap to pre-COVID conditions in this metric of 1.7 percentage points, meaning that a little under 50 percent of the 3.2 percentage point gap that existed in December 2020 had been closed by August 2021.Return to text 9. The Census Bureau estimates that the number of non-employed individuals citing one of these factors as their main reason for not working rose from 2.0 million in wave 34 of the Household Pulse Survey (reflecting data collected from July 21 to August 2) to 4.7 million in wave 37 (reflecting September 1 to September 13). For more information, seehttps://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/household-pulse-survey/data.html.Return to text 10. These data are reported by Burbio through September 20. For the most recent update, see https://info.burbio.com/school-tracker-update-latest.Return to text 11. See, for example, Claire Cain Miller (2021), "'Can't Compete': Why Hiring for Child Care Is a Huge Struggle,"New York Times,September 21, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/21/upshot/child-care.html.Return to text 12. Recent research found that women with very young children, who accounted for 10 percent of the pre-pandemic workforce, accounted for almost one-fourth of the unanticipated decline in employment during the pandemic. See M. Melinda Pitts (2021), "Where Are They Now? Workers with Young Children during COVID-19 (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Policy Hub,No. 2021-10. Previous research also indicates that participation for mothers in households with an annual income below $50,000 per year declined nearly 9 percent relative to pre-pandemic levels, while participation for mothers in households with incomes above $100,000 fell a little under 2 percent. For more information, see Olivia Lofton, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lily Seitelman (2021), "Parents in a Pandemic Labor Market," Working Paper Series 2021-04 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February).Return to text 13 The number of unemployed in this alternative V/U ratio adjusts for the misclassification of some unemployed workers as employed but not at work (as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) and for diminished labor force participation induced by the pandemic (as estimated by the Federal Reserve Board staff). See footnote 5.Return to text 14. See Tomaz Cajner, John Coglianese, and Joshua Montes (2021), "The Long-Lived Cyclicality of the Labor Force Participation Rate," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-047 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July). See also Bart Hobijn and Ayşegül Şahin (2021), "Maximum Employment and the Participation Cycle (PDF)," prepared for the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, "Macroeconomic Policy in an Uneven Economy," August 27.Return to text 15. The August 12-month weighted median CPI was 2.4 percent—less than half of the 12-month CPI reading in August of 5-1/4 percent—suggesting significant skew in the distribution of price changes in the CPI basket. For more information on the weighted median CPI, seehttps://www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/indicators-and-data/median-cpi/background-and-resources.aspx.Return to text 16. The TIPS measure is based on CPI inflation, which generally runs a bit above PCE inflation.Return to text 17. Olivier Armantier, Fatima Boumahdi, Leo Goldman, Gizem Koşar, Jessica Lu, Giorgio Topa, and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2021), "Have Consumers' Long-Run Inflation Expectations Become Un-Anchored?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics,September 24.Return to text * Note: On September 28, 2021, the following sentence was amended to clarify the time period for the data referenced: "For example, last week there were just over 2,000 school closures for COVID across nearly 470 school districts in 39 states."Return to text