Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Farm Credit Administration Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation National Credit Union Administration Office of the Comptroller of the Currency WASHINGTON — Five federal regulatory agencies today requested public comment on 24 proposed Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Private Flood Insurance. The proposal is intended to help lenders comply with the agencies' joint rule promulgated in 2019 to implement the private flood insurance provisions of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012. The proposal incorporates new questions and answers in a number of areas including: These Questions and Answers would supplement the 118 Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Flood Insurance that the agencies proposed on July 6, 2020. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Loans in Areas Having Special Flood Hazards; Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Private Flood Insurance (PDF) Board Votes
Five federal financial regulatory agencies are gathering insight on financial institutions' use of artificial intelligence (AI). The agencies seek information from the public on how financial institutions use AI in their activities, including fraud prevention, personalization of customer services, credit underwriting, and other operations. The Federal Reserve Board, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) announced the request for information (RFI) to gain input from financial institutions, trade associations, consumer groups, and other stakeholders on the growing use of AI by financial institutions. More specifically, the RFI seeks comments to better understand the use of AI, including machine learning, by financial institutions; appropriate governance, risk management, and controls over AI; challenges in developing, adopting, and managing AI; and whether any clarification would be helpful. Comments will be accepted for 60 days following publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice:Request for Information and Comment on Financial Institutions’ Use of Artificial Intelligence, including Machine Learning
Chair Jerome H. Powell At "Pushing the Frontiers of Payments: Towards Faster, Cheaper, More Transparent and More Inclusive Cross Border Payments," a conference hosted by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, Basel, Switzerland (via prerecorded video) I would like to thank Sir Jon Cunliffe and the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) for inviting me to close out the first day of this conference on pushing the frontiers of payments. Last year, the Group of Twenty (G-20) asked the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to coordinate the development of a roadmap on how the global community could enhance cross-border payments. It has long been acknowledged that the existing system, while safe and dependable, suffers from frictions, including processes that make it difficult to comply with anti-money-laundering and countering-terrorist-financing requirements, difficulty in managing payments across time zones, and, in certain areas, a reliance on outdated technology. Moreover, these frictions contribute to higher costs for cross-border transactions. As with many aspects of life these days, the COVID-19 pandemic has shined a light on the less efficient areas of our current payment system and accelerated the desire for improvement and digitalization. Even before the pandemic, advancements in the private sector served as a catalyst to get the attention of consumers and to prompt more engagement by the public sector. The goal of the FSB roadmap is simple—to create an ecosystem for cross-border payments that is faster, cheaper, more transparent, and more inclusive. A year into the process, I am encouraged that we are making meaningful progress. The stage 3 report released in October laid out a practical set of steps for moving ahead on the 19 building blocks that will bring about an improved system.1 Indeed, the themes discussed in the four sessions of the conference today correspond well to approaches described in the building blocks. The title of the first panel sets up a choice between "improving existing rails or laying new tracks." As the roadmap makes clear, one of the keys to moving forward will be doing both—improving the existing system where we can while also evaluating the potential of and the best uses for emerging technologies. As an example, the Federal Reserve is working to improve the current system through the introduction of instant or fast payments via the FedNow Service.2The service will be designed to maintain uninterrupted processing—24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year—with security features that will ensure payment integrity and data security. The target launch date is sometime in 2023.* The Federal Reserve is also doing its part to examine the role of new technologies. Experiments with central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) are being conducted at the Board of Governors, as well as complementary efforts by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in collaboration with researchers at MIT. In addition, a recent report from the Bank for International Settlements and a group of seven central banks, which includes the Fed, assessed the feasibility of CBDCs in helping central banks deliver their public policy objectives.3Relevant to today's topic, one of the three key principles highlighted in the report is that a CBDC needs to coexist with cash and other types of money in a flexible and innovative payment system. Improvements in the global payments system will come not just from the public sector, but from the private sector as well. As today's second panel, "Of Lions and Unicorns," described, the private sector has the experience and expertise to develop consumer-facing infrastructure that improves and simplifies how the public engages with the financial system. Digitalization of financial services, combined with an improved consumer experience, can help increase financial inclusion, particularly in countries or areas with a large unbanked population. And the last two panels of the day, "Addressing Legal Barriers to Cross-Border Payments" and "Harmonised Data to Oil the Cross-Border Payments Machinery," highlight that improving the system must be a collaborative effort. By definition, cross-border payments involve multiple jurisdictions. So it will only be through countries working together, via all of the international forums—the Group of Seven, the G-20, the CPMI, the FSB, and others—that solutions will be possible. And, finally, it is only by engaging all stakeholders—policymakers, private-sector participants, and academia—as this conference is doing, that we will achieve the improved payments ecosystem we are striving toward. The COVID crisis has brought into even sharper focus the need to address the limitations of our current arrangements for cross-border payments. And as this conference amply demonstrates, despite the challenges of this last year, we still have been able to make important progress. I again thank the CPMI and Jon Cunliffe for their leadership and look forward to working together as we improve these payments for businesses and individuals alike. 1. See Financial Stability Board (2020),Enhancing Cross-Border Payments: Stage 3 Roadmap(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, October).Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Reserve Announces Details of New 24x7x365 Interbank Settlement Service with Clearing Functionality to Support Instant Payments in the United States," press release, August 6.Return to text 3. See Bank for International Settlements (2020), "Central Banks and BIS Publish First Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) Report Laying Out Key Requirements," press release, October 9.Return to text * This sentence was updated after publication: the phrase "sometime in late 2023 or 2024" was updated to "sometime in 2023".Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on March 24, 2021. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the measures we have taken to address the hardship wrought by the pandemic. I would like to start by noting the upcoming one-year anniversary of the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic SecurityAct). With unanimous approval, Congress provided by far the fastest and largest response to any postwar economic downturn, offering fiscal support for households, businesses, health-care providers, and state and local governments. This historically important legislation provided critical support in our nation's hour of need. As the virus arrived in force, our immediate challenge was to limit the severity and duration of the fallout to avoid longer-run damage. At the Fed, we also acted with unprecedented speed and force, using the full range of policy tools at our disposal. Today the situation is much improved. While the economic fallout has been real and widespread, the worst was avoided by swift and vigorous action—from Congress and the Federal Reserve, from across government and cities and towns, and from individuals, communities, and the private sector. More people held on to their jobs, more businesses kept their doors open, and more incomes were saved. But the recovery is far from complete, so, at the Fed, we will continue to provide the economy the support that it needs for as long as it takes. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. Since January, the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths has fallen, and ongoing vaccinations offer hope for a return to more normal conditions later this year. In the meantime, continued social distancing and mask wearing will help us reach that goal. Indicators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently. Household spending on goods has risen notably so far this year, although spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require in-person gatherings. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have recently improved. Employment rose by 379,000 in February, as the leisure and hospitality sector recouped about two-thirds of the jobs it lost in December and January. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected and looks to be strengthening. This is due in significant part to the unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy actions I mentioned, which provided essential support to households, businesses, and communities. However, the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus, and by greater social distancing, remain weak, and the unemployment rate—still elevated at 6.2 percent—underestimates the shortfall, particularly as labor market participation remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. We welcome this progress, but will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who are still hurting, including lower-wage workers in the services sector, African Americans, Hispanics, and other minority groups that have been especially hard hit. The Federal Reserve's response has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. When financial markets came under intense pressure last year, we took broad and forceful actions, deploying both our conventional and emergency lending tools to more directly support the flow of credit. Our actions, taken together, helped unlock more than $2 trillion in funding to support businesses large and small, nonprofits, and state and local governments between April and December. This support, in turn, has helped keep organizations from shuttering and put employers in both a better position to keep workers on and to hire them back as the recovery continues. Our programs served as a backstop to key credit markets and helped restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent last year. Our emergency lending powers require the approval of the Treasury and are available only in very unusual circumstances. Many of these programs were supported by funding from the CARES Act. Those facilities provided essential support through a very difficult year. They are now closed, and the Federal Reserve has returned the large majority of the Treasury's CARES Act equity, as required by law. Our other emergency lending facilities are following suit imminently, although we recently extended the PPPLF (Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility) for another quarter to continue to support the PPP (Paycheck Protection Program). Everything the Fed does is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible on behalf of communities, families, and businesses across the country. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. (Billions of dollars) Note: The data are current as of March 17, 2021. 1. The maximum authorized amount of facility asset purchases.Return to table 2. Current and peak outstanding amounts of facility asset purchases: 3. The amount of the Treasury contribution to the credit facilities.Return to table Source: Staff calculations.
Federal bank regulatory agencies today announced an interim final rule that supports the Treasury Department's implementation of a program established by Congress to make capital investments in minority depository institutions and community development financial institutions. TheTreasury Department's Emergency Capital Investment Program(ECIP) will support the efforts of these financial institutions to provide loans, grants, and forbearance to small businesses, minority-owned businesses, and consumers, especially in low-income and underserved communities, which may be disproportionately affected by COVID-19. Under the program, Treasury will purchase preferred stock or subordinated debt from qualifying minority depository institutions and community development financial institutions, with the corresponding dividend or interest rate based on the institution meeting lending targets. To facilitate implementation of ECIP, the agencies are revising their capital rules to provide that Treasury's investments under the program qualify as regulatory capital of insured depository institutions and holding companies. The rule is effective immediately upon publication in theFederal Registerand comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication. Federal Registernotice: Amendments to the capital rule to facilitate the Emergency Capital Investment Program
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that the temporary and additional restrictions on bank holding company dividends and share repurchases currently in place will end for most firms after June 30, after completion of the current round of stress tests. Firms with capital levels above those required by the stress test will no longer be subject to the additional restrictions as of that date. Firms with capital levels below those required by the stress test will remain subject to the restrictions. "The banking system continues to be a source of strength and returning to our normal framework after this year's stress test will preserve that strength," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. After two rounds of stress tests last year, the Board found that large banks had strong capital levels, which provide a cushion against losses. However, due to economic uncertainty from the COVID event, the Board put temporary and additional restrictions on capital distributions. Those restrictions limit bank dividends and share repurchases to an amount based on income over the past year. Normally, a large bank's capital distributions are restricted principally by the Board's stress capital buffer, or SCB, framework. The SCB sets a capital target for each bank based on its individual stress test results, which requires the bank to hold at least enough capital to survive a severe recession. If a firm does not meet that target, automatic restrictions are imposed. If a bank remains above all of its minimum risk-based capital requirements in this year's stress test, the additional restrictions will end after June 30 and it will be subject to the SCB's normal restrictions. However, a bank that falls below any of its minimum risk-based requirements in the stress test will remain subject to the additional restrictions for three extra months, through September 30. If the firm remains below the capital required by the stress test at that time, the framework of the regular SCB regime will impose even stricter distribution limitations. For a bank that is not subject to the stress test this year and on a two-year cycle, the additional restrictions will end after June 30 and its SCB requirements based on the June 2020 stress test will remain in place. The Board's stress tests help ensure that large banks can support the economy during economic downturns. The tests evaluate the resilience of large banks by estimating their losses, revenue and capital levels under hypothetical scenarios over nine future quarters. Results for this year's test will be released by July 1. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday adopted a final rule outlining and confirming the use of supervisory guidance for regulated institutions. The final rule generally codifies a statement issued in September 2018 clarifying the differences between regulations and guidance and is substantially similar to the proposal issued last year. Unlike a law or regulation, supervisory guidance does not have the force and effect of law, and the agencies do not take enforcement actions based on supervisory guidance. Rather, guidance outlines expectations and priorities, or articulates views regarding appropriate practices for a specific subject. The rule will be effective 30 days after publication in theFederal Registerand mirrors the rules issued by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Role of Supervisory Guidance Board Memo: Final Rule on the Role of Supervisory Guidance (PDF)* *On May 14, 2021, this press release was updated to include the Board memo.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced it will extend its Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, or PPPLF, by three months to June 30, 2021. The extension will provide continued support for the flow of credit to small businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP. The PPPLF extends term credit to financial institutions making PPP loans, accepting the PPP loans as collateral. The liquidity provided by the PPPLF helps eligible financial institutions fund additional PPP loans. The PPPLF was established under the Board's 13(3) authority and the extension from March 31 to June 30, 2021, was approved by the Secretary of the Treasury. The other currently active 13(3) facilities—the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility—have not had significant usage since last summer and will expire as scheduled on March 31. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility Term Sheet (PDF)Updated term sheet:Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility Term Sheet
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that the temporary change to its supplementary leverage ratio, or SLR, for bank holding companies will expire as scheduled on March 31. Additionally, the Board will shortly seek comment on measures to adjust the SLR. The Board will take appropriate actions to assure that any changes to the SLR do not erode the overall strength of bank capital requirements. To ease strains in the Treasury market resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and to promote lending to households and businesses, the Board temporarily modified the SLR last year to exclude U.S. Treasury securities and central bank reserves. Since that time, the Treasury market has stabilized. However, because of recent growth in the supply of central bank reserves and the issuance of Treasury securities, the Board may need to address the current design and calibration of the SLR over time to prevent strains from developing that could both constrain economic growth and undermine financial stability. To ensure that the SLR—which was established in 2014 as an additional capital requirement—remains effective in an environment of higher reserves, the Board will soon be inviting public comment on several potential SLR modifications. The proposal and comments will contribute to ongoing discussions with the Department of the Treasury and other regulators on future work to ensure the resiliency of the Treasury market. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve on Friday clarified guidance as it relates to definitions for minority depository institutions (MDIs), expanded the MDI definition to include women-owned financial institutions, and highlighted resources available to MDIs through its Partnership for Progress (PFP) program. The Federal Reserve System supports an inclusive financial system and understands the challenges inherent in providing access to credit and other financial services in traditionally underserved areas. The System remains strongly committed to identifying and carrying through all opportunities to support MDIs, consistent with its statutory mandates. The PFP program is the Federal Reserve's national MDI outreach program and implements efforts to preserve and promote MDIs. Since its creation in 2008, the program has provided MDIs with resources to help them operate in a safe-and-sound manner, adhere to laws that protect consumers, and meet Federal Reserve Board supervisory standards. PFP program staff engages with MDIs by conducting outreach and providing technical assistance, training, education, and convenings for MDIs. By law, the term "minority" means any Black American, Native American, Hispanic American, or Asian American. The System's definition of MDI is consistent with the statutory definition of "minority bank," and states that an MDI is any depository institution where a majority of the voting stock is owned by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals. In addition to institutions that meet that qualifying criteria, the System considers an institution to be an MDI if a majority of its board of directors consists of minority individuals and the community that the institution serves is predominantly minority. In addition to the statutory provisions, the System's definition of MDI recognizes women's depository institutions, and will provide women's depository institutions with the same PFP resources as other MDIs. The System's definition of "women's depository institution" is consistent with the definition of this term in the Community Reinvestment Act, and includes any depository institution where a majority of ownership or a majority of revenue is held by at least one woman, and a significant percentage of senior management positions of which are held by women. The PFP website (www.fedpartnership.gov) is maintained as a primary resource for providing updates to MDIs and System supervisory staff concerning the program and any enhancements to it. The supervisory guidance is attached. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955 SR 21-6 / CA 21-4: Highlighting the Federal Reserve System's Partnership for Progress Program for Minority Depository Institutions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Allegiant United Holdings, LLC, Irvine, California; Nano Financial Holdings, Inc., Irvine, California; and Nano Banc, Irvine, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated February 24, 2021 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Bryn Mawr Trust Company, Bryn Mawr, PennsylvaniaFlood insurance violations civil money penalty, dated March 16, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition Order against Chastaly ArroyoFormer employee of Fifth Third Bank, Cincinnati, OhioUnauthorized disclosure of customer account information Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition against Adriana MontemayorFormer employee Texas Community Bank, Laredo, TexasMisappropriation of bank funds Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Prohibition against Frank E. Smith and Mark A. Kiolbasa, institution-affiliated parties of Farmers State Bank, Pine Bluffs, Wyoming, for breach of fiduciary duties and engaging in unsafe or unsound practices. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF) Attachment 3 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Orient Bancorporation, San Francisco, California; Bank of the Orient, San Francisco, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated March 18, 2021 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent Prohibition against Jessica ShireyFormer employee of Gateway Bank, Rison, ArkansasMisappropriation of customer funds Consent Prohibition against Jeremy BolesFormer employee of SunTrust Bank, Atlanta, GeorgiaMisappropriation of customer funds Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday published frequently asked questions (FAQs) comprising existing legal interpretations related to a number of the Board's longstanding regulations. The FAQs are intended to increase transparency and enhance accessibility to Board and Board staff legal interpretations. The FAQs include legal interpretations that have been formulated over time in response to specific requests related to each regulation. Each set includes significant existing interpretations of the regulation, including those found in Board orders, letters to specific requestors, and other sources, as well as those not previously available in written form. Additional FAQs will be released periodically and posted on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Legal Interpretations FAQs of the Board's Regulations
The Federal Reserve System on Monday released the 2020 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks, as well as statements for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks, the Board of Governors, and five limited liability companies (LLC's) that manage and operate some of the credit facilities established by the Board in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. An independent public accounting firm engaged by the Board has issued unqualified opinions on the financial statements and on the Board's and each Bank's internal controls over financial reporting. The audited financial statements provide information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Reserve Banks, the Board, and the LLC's as of December 31, 2020. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2020 earnings were approximately $88.6 billion, representing an increase of $33.1 billion from 2019. The Reserve Banks provided for remittances to the U.S. Treasury of $86.9 billion in 2020. Interest income on securities acquired through open market operations totaled $101.2 billion, a decrease of $1.6 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on depository institutions' reserve balances during the year was $7.9 billion, a decrease of $27.1 billion from the previous year. Interest expense on securities sold under agreements to repurchase was $711.2 million, a decrease of $5.3 billion from the previous year. The Federal Reserve Banks realized net income of $275.0 million from the credit facilities established by the Board in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Reserve Bank operating expenses were $7.9 billion, including assessments of $2.3 billion for Board expenses, currency costs, and the operations of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. Total Reserve Bank assets as of December 31, 2019, were approximately $7.4 trillion, an increase of $3.2 trillion from the previous year. Total Reserve Bank assets were composed primarily of $7.1 trillion of securities under agreements to resell, U.S. Treasury securities, and federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise mortgage-backed securities acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on its website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/pomo_landing.html. The Board engages KPMG LLP, an independent public accounting firm, to conduct annual audits of these financial statements in accordance with auditing standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and, for the Board of Governors audit only, the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards. The public accounting firm also conducts audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/audited-annual-financial-statements.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At "Transform Tomorrow Today" Ceres 2021 Conference, Boston, Massachusetts (via webcast) I want to thank Ceres for inviting me to join this discussion. Let me start by noting that these are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.1 Climate change is already imposing substantial economic costs and is projected to have a profound effect on the economy at home and abroad.2Future financial and economic effects will depend on the severity of the physical effects of climate change and the nature and speed of the transition to a sustainable economy.3Financial market participants that do not put in place frameworks to assess and address climate-related risks could face significant losses on climate-sensitive assets caused by environmental shifts, by a disorderly transition, or both. Conversely, robust risk management; scenario analysis; consistent, comparable disclosures; and forward plans can help ensure the financial system is resilient to climate-related risks and well positioned to support the transition to a sustainable economy.4 Macroprudential and Microprudential ApproachesIt is increasingly clear that climate change could have important implications for the Federal Reserve in carrying out its responsibilities assigned by the Congress.5Given the implications of climate change for both individual financial institutions and the financial sector as a whole, we need a framework that incorporates both microprudential and macroprudential considerations. The Federal Reserve created a new Supervision Climate Committee (SCC) to strengthen our capacity to identify and assess financial risks from climate change and to develop an appropriate program to ensure the resilience of our supervised firms to those risks.6The SCC's microprudential work to ensure the safety and soundness of financial institutions constitutes one core pillar of the Federal Reserve's framework for addressing the economic and financial consequences of climate change.7 Climate change and the transition to a sustainable economy also pose risks to the stability of the broader financial system. So a second core pillar of our framework seeks to address the macrofinancial risks of climate change. To complement the work of the SCC, the Federal Reserve Board is establishing a Financial Stability Climate Committee (FSCC) to identify, assess, and address climate-related risks to financial stability. The FSCC will approach this work from a macroprudential perspective—that is, one that considers the potential for complex interactions across the financial system. From a microprudential perspective, the Federal Reserve'sSupervision and Regulation Reportdiscusses how the effects of climate change can manifest in the financial system via traditional channels like credit, market, operational, legal, and reputational risks that affect the safety and soundness of individual firms.8From a macroprudential perspective, ourFinancial Stability Reportoutlines how climate change could increase financial shocks and financial system vulnerabilities that could further amplify shocks.9 Microprudential and macroprudential objectives are often aligned. For example, consistent disclosures are important not only to enable individual financial firms to measure and manage their exposure to climate-related financial risks, but also to support financial stability more broadly by helping the market to accurately price that risk. Given the importance of consistent, comparable, and reliable disclosures to financial stability and prudential objectives, mandatory disclosures are ultimately likely to be important.10 There are situations, however, where microprudential and macroprudential goals do not fully align so that it is important to take into account the implications both for individual firms' safety and soundness and also for the broader financial system. For example, the use of climate-related risk mitigants such as insurance or financial derivatives may shift risk away from a particular financial institution but may not reduce or eliminate risk from the system as a whole. In developing a framework to address climate-related financial risks, we need to be mindful of this cascade of effects and the implications across the Federal Reserve's range of responsibilities. Financial System Shocks and Vulnerabilities Arising from Climate ChangeOur macroprudential work program is focused on assessing not only potential climate shocks, but also whether climate change might make the financial system more vulnerable in ways that could amplify these shocks and cause broader knock-on effects that could harm households, businesses, and communities. In some respects, climate change can be seen as similar to other financial stability shocks emanating from outside the financial system, such as COVID-19, which are difficult to predict with precision and can lead to an abrupt reassessment of a broad array of economic and financial outcomes, prices, and incentives. However, climate change shocks differ in a few important ways. Unlike episodic or transitory shocks, climate change is an ongoing, cumulative process, which is expected to produce a series of shocks. Over time, these shocks can change the statistical time-series properties of economic variables, making forecasting based on historical experience more difficult and less reliable. The physical properties of the earth's atmosphere shown by scientific climate records and climatological forecasts include the risk of irreversible climate "tipping points," which can cause as yet unseen disruptions in weather systems, regional water supplies, and the habitability of large land masses—at large magnitudes. Quantifying the risks and implications of potentially catastrophic climate-related tipping points for the economy and financial system is extremely difficult. Second, there is substantial uncertainty about the nature and timing of the policy, behavioral, and technological changes that will occur during the transition to a sustainable economy. This uncertainty could create significant challenges for financial stability. In addition, climate change might be expected to increase financial system vulnerabilities.11Financial system vulnerabilities could arise if intermediaries engage in financial contracts or take on leverage to shift climate risk in ways that leave the overall system vulnerable to the amplifying effects of shocks. In addition, even well-informed investors could underestimate the likelihood of large shocks related to climate change, resulting in systematic mispricing of risk. This mispricing could occur if the physical effects of climate change arrive sooner or with greater intensity than expected or investors systematically err in their expectations about the transition. Finally, vulnerabilities could result if climate risks in the aggregate are systematically correlated across participants in the economy and financial system. These correlated aggregate exposures could be missed by risk models and difficult or impossible to mitigate fully. It might be useful to consider some examples of climate-related risks that could manifest as shocks or increase financial system vulnerabilities or both.12One example is property and casualty insurance, which enables financial firms to engage in financial contracts to hedge climate-related risks. While reinsurance contracts and agreements among investors can shift risks across the global financial system, as I noted earlier, some level of risk is likely to remain.13A lack of transparency across participants in the financial sector could cause climate-related risks to build up in hidden pockets, embedding vulnerabilities that could result in cascading losses in the event of large-scale adverse weather outcomes or other shocks to asset valuations. We can already see examples of how such ripple effects might work. As physical risks manifest, insurers update the availability and pricing of coverage to more accurately reflect climate-related risks to real estate, physical facilities, and companies that are subject to these risks through financing arrangements or supply chains. As we have seen in California and in Florida, insurance companies can pull back from insuring properties and facilities in geographic areas subject to heightened flood or fire risk or seek to raise insurance rates on these properties and facilities to more accurately reflect risks.14Although such changes may ultimately result in a more accurate assessment of actual risks, the abrupt changes to a wide range of contracts that embed systemic mispricing could initially amplify the shock. It is also increasingly apparent that the value and, in some cases, the usability of real estate in many areas will be directly affected by the increased risks of floods, wildfires, severe storms, and sea-level rise associated with climate change. The direct effects on homeowners and businesses are geographically concentrated and can have severe effects on safety and the usability of properties. As climate risks grow over time, the mortgages on these properties may become riskier, along with financial instruments involving these mortgages that may embed opaque, concentrated climate-related risks. Sudden realizations of climate-related risks could cause rapid shifts in investor sentiment and shocks to asset prices, including to real estate prices in specific geographic locations.15 Federal, state, and local authorities are implementing policies to support transparency in climate-related risk associated with real estate to allow property owners, lenders, and investors to make better-informed investment decisions. Updated flood maps, coastal resilience programs, and managed retreat from flood-prone areas can reduce the extent of hidden climate risks. While such transparency is vital, financial system vulnerabilities could arise even in transparent markets—for example, through aggregate common exposures to climate risk. Finally, climate-related physical risks are increasing financial burdens on local, state, and federal finances. Increasing physical damage to localities necessitates higher expenditures to repair damage from extreme weather and fire events and to build resilience to growing climate threats. Pullbacks in insurance coverage, the need to relocate or bolster infrastructure, and increased provision of service in the wake of disasters increase burdens on state, local, and federal finances. These rising burdens could place strains on municipal financing markets over time, particularly in areas of geographically concentrated climate risks, and create some risk of a cascade effect if a shock causes investors to pull back from similar exposures. New Approaches and New ToolsWe are building the requisite institutional capacity and knowledge to deepen our understanding of these risks and vulnerabilities. The new FSCC is a Systemwide committee charged with developing and implementing a program to assess and address climate-related risks to financial stability. The broad goals of the FSCC are to promote the resilience of the financial system to climate-related financial risks, to ensure coordination with the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and its member agencies, and to increase the Federal Reserve's international engagement and influence on this issue. The FSCC will work in close coordination with the SCC—as well as with our community development, payments, international coordination, and economic research and data areas—to build a coordinated approach to integrating climate-related risks where they affect our responsibilities. To support the work of these committees and the broader work throughout the Federal Reserve System, we are investing in new research, data, and modeling tools. In light of the high uncertainty inherent in estimating climate-related shocks, scenario analysis may be a helpful tool to assess the effects on the financial system under a wide range of assumptions.16Climate scenario analysis identifies climate-related physical and transition risk factors facing financial firms, formulates appropriate stresses of those risk factors under different scenarios, and measures their effects on financial intermediaries and the financial system. This analytic approach gives us a structured way of uncovering the parts of the financial system where physical, transition, and other risks may have outsized effects through potential spillovers. It also helps identify the limits of our knowledge. For scenario analysis, we would anticipate long time horizons, substantial uncertainty, the use of qualitative elements, and reliance on external data and models. To capture the potential for complex interactions across the financial system, such scenario analysis would consider the effects on bank and nonbank financial intermediaries and financial markets broadly. We are informing ourselves about the scenario analysis work under way by policymakers in foreign jurisdictions, such as by the European Central Bank and the Bank of England, as well as the scenarios developed by the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS).17 Collaboration across Jurisdictions and SectorsClimate change is inherently a cross-border and cross-sectoral challenge, and we recognize the benefit of collaborating with other regulatory agencies, central banks, and international standard-setting bodies while taking into account the important differences across jurisdictions. In the United States, close coordination with the FSOC member agencies will be important. We are also working with member agencies of the U.S. Global Change Research Program to learn about scientific data, models, and other information to expand our analysis of the economic and financial effects of weather-related disasters and climate-related risks.18 We participate actively in the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) work on climate change. The FSB's membership, mandate, and relationship with the Group of Twenty (G-20) and the standard-setting bodies position it well to play a coordinating role in addressing the interdependencies among different workstreams and supporting the G-20—including the G-20 Sustainable Finance Study Group co-chaired by the U.S. Treasury. The FSB has been tasked by the G-20 to play a leadership role on data gaps and to identify recommendations to support the use of comprehensive, comparable, and auditable climate-related disclosure standards. In addition, the Federal Reserve is co-chairing one of the workstreams—the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Risks (TFCR). We are actively gathering essential knowledge from a wide range of groups, including nongovernmental organizations such as Ceres, private-sector market participants, academic researchers, and others. The Federal Reserve recently became a member of the NGFS, which is sharing research and identifying best practices to improve the financial system's resilience to climate-related risks. ConclusionThese are not easy problems, and they will not have easy solutions. Despite the challenges, it will be critical to make progress, even if initially imperfect, in order to ensure that the financial system is resilient to climate-related risks and well positioned for the transition to a sustainable economy. We are committed to building our capacity to understand and address the risks, complexities, and challenges related to climate change within the Federal Reserve's responsibilities. In working toward these goals, we will undoubtedly reach better outcomes if we tackle this challenge through open dialogue, information sharing, and transparency. 1. I am grateful to Elizabeth Kiser of the Federal Reserve for her assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. See David R. Reidmiller, Christopher W. Avery, David R. Easterling, Kenneth E. Kunkel, Kristin L. M. Lewis, Thomas K. Maycock, and Brooke C. Stewart, eds. (2018),Fourth National Climate Assessment,vol. II:Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States(Washington: U.S. Global Change Research Program).Return to text 3. On the effects of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty, see Valérie Masson-Delmotte, Panmao Zhai, Hans-Otto Pörtner, Debra Roberts, Jim Skea, Priyardarshi R. Shukla, Anna Pirani, Wilfran Moufouma-Okia, Clotilde Péan, Roz Pidcock, Sarah Connors, J. B. Robin Matthews, Yang Chen, Xiao Zhou, Melissa I. Gomis, Elisabeth Lonnoy, Tom Maycock, Melinda Tignor, and Tim Waterfield, eds. (2018),Summary for Policymakers of IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C Approved by Governments(Geneva: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).Return to text 4. See, for example, Financial Stability Board (2020),The Implications of Climate Change for Financial Stability(PDF), (Basel: FSB, November 23); and Climate-Related Market Risk Subcommittee, Market Risk Advisory Committee, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2020),Managing Climate Risk in the U.S. Financial System(PDF)(Washington: CFTC, September 9).Return to text 5. A recent survey of central banks found a large majority view it as appropriate "to act within their existing mandate to mitigate climate-related financial risks" that "could potentially impact the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions and could pose potential financial stability concerns for the financial system." See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements (2020),Climate-Related Financial Risks: A Survey on Current Initiatives(PDF)(Basel: BCBS, April);see also Nick Robins, Simon Dikau, and Ulrich Volz (2021),Net-Zero Central Banking: A New Phase in Greening the Financial System(PDF), (London: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics and Political Science, March). For overviews of climate change and economic damage, see, for example, Maximilian Auffhammer (2018), "Quantifying Economic Damages from Climate Change,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 32 (Fall), pp. 33–52; Solomon Hsiang and Robert E. Kopp (2018), "An Economist's Guide to Climate Change Science (PDF),"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 32 (Fall), pp. 3–32; and Solomon Hsiang, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan, D. J. Rasmussen, Robert Muir-Wood, Paul Wilson, Michael Oppenheimer, Kate Larsen, and Trevor Houser (2017), "Estimating Economic Damage from Climate Change in the United States,"Science,vol. 356 (June), pp. 1362–69.Return to text 6.See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2021), "Kevin Stiroh to Step Down as Head of New York Fed Supervision to Assume New System Leadership Role at Board of Governors on Climate," press release, January 25.Return to text 7. See Lael Brainard (2021), "The Role of Financial Institutions in Tackling the Challenges of Climate Change," speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance U.S. Climate Finance Summit: Financing a Pro Growth Pro Markets Transition to a Sustainable, Low-Carbon Economy, Washington, February 18.Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 10. See Allison Herren Lee (2021), "Public Input Welcomed on Climate Change Disclosures," public statement by the Acting Chair of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, March 15.Return to text 11. See Celso Brunetti, Benjamin Dennis, Dylan Gates, Diana Hancock, David Ignell, Elizabeth K. Kiser, Gurubala Kotta, Anna Kovner, Richard J. Rosen, and Nicholas K. Tabor (2021), "Climate Change and Financial Stability," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 19).Return to text 12. See Brunetti and others, "Climate Change and Financial Stability," in note 11;see also Sonia I. Seneviratne, Neville Nicholls, David Easterling, Claire M. Goodess, Shinjiro Kanae, James Kossin, Yali Luo, Jose Marengo, Kathleen McInnes, Mohammad Rahimi, Markus Reichstein, Asgeir Sorteberg, Carolina Vera, and Xuebin Zhang (2012), "Changes in Climate Extremes and Their Impacts on the Natural Physical Environment" in Matilde Rusticucci and Vladimir Semenov, eds.,Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York), pp. 109–230.Return to text 13. See, for example, Antonio Grimaldi, Kia Javanmardian, Dickon Pinner, Hamid Samandari, and Kurt Strovink (2020), "Climate Change and P&C Insurance: The Threat and Opportunity,"McKinsey Insights,November 19, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/climate-change-and-p-and-c-insurance-the-threat-and-opportunity: "...insurers could play a role in matching risk transfer solutions to alternative capital from investors with more risk appetite."Return to text 14. See, for example, Christopher Flavelle (2019), "As Wildfires Get Worse, Insurers Pull Back from Riskiest Areas,"New York Times,August 20; and Matt Sheehan (2020), "RenRe Could Pull Back in Florida if Rates Stay Low, Says CEO,"Reinsurance News,February 7.Return to text 15. The Federal Housing Finance Authority recently issued a request for input on natural disaster risk to the housing finance system; see Federal Housing Finance Agency (2021), "FHFA Issues RFI on Climate and Natural Disaster Risk Management at the Regulated Entities," news release, January 19.Return to text 16. See Brainard, "The Role of Financial Institutions in Tackling the Challenges of Climate Change," in note 7.Return to text 17. See Luis de Guindos (2021), "Shining a Light on Climate Risks: The ECB's Economy-wide Climate Stress Test,"The ECB Blog,March 18;and Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (2020), "NGFS Climate Scenarios for Central Banks and Supervisors (PDF)" (Paris: NGFS, June).Return to text 18. See Reidmiller and others,Fourth National Climate Assessment,vol. II:Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States,in note 2.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "The SOFR Symposium: The Final Year," an event hosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, New York, New York (via webcast) I am pleased to join this first symposium being held by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) to mark the key year of the LIBOR transition.1I have had a vantage point in supporting this transition in my roles both as Chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which convened the Official Sector Steering Group in 2013 to coordinate global benchmark rate reform efforts at the request of the Group of Twenty, and as a member of the Federal Reserve Board, which convened the ARRC in 2014 under the auspices of then-Governor Jay Powell. Since these groups were first formed, we have seen great progress in building markets and infrastructures designed to facilitate the transition. This year, however, it is finally time for everyone to actively transition away from using LIBOR. Since 2017, when Andrew Bailey first announced that the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) had secured a voluntary agreement with the remaining panel banks submitting to LIBOR to continue their submissions through 2021, we in the official sector have emphasized that LIBOR would eventually end, but the market has lacked clarity on exactly when it would end. Because the FCA had committed to avoiding the use of its powers to compel any bank to remain on the panels after the agreement ended, the decision to submit for a further period or to depart was up to the banks themselves. And while the panel banks had committed to continue submissions through the end of this year, they had not stated what they planned to do afterward. Although one might have expected that a statement from the regulator that a benchmark would stop might cause people to think twice before using it even if the exact end date were uncertain, many have kept using LIBOR. It may be that the ambiguity about a precise end date encouraged some to believe that it would not actually end. If so, the recent statements from the administrator of LIBOR and FCA should erase any remaining doubts as to exactly when and whether LIBOR will end. To summarize, thanks to recent statements by the FCA and ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA, the administrator of LIBOR), we now know the following: Adjusting to a new reality can be difficult, so let me be clear: These statements are definitive. Some may speculate that the June 2023 date could be pushed back, but IBA has now stated that it will not have sufficient panel bank submissions after this date, the FCA has officially recognized this date, and the spread adjustments under the International Swaps and Derivatives Association's (ISDA) IBOR Fallbacks Protocol have been set accordingly.2There is no scenario in which a panel-based USD LIBOR will continue past June 2023, and nobody should expect it to. Seeking to provide the same kind of clear statement about supervisory expectations, U.S. regulators issued supervisory guidance in November of last year.3In a letter to the banking organizations that we regulate, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency noted that there are safety and soundness risks associated with the continued use of USD LIBOR in new transactions after 2021. Accordingly, we have encouraged supervised entities to stop new use of LIBOR as soon as is practicable and, in any event, by the end of this year. As with the statements about LIBOR's end, there should be complete certainty about this guidance from U.S. regulators: after 2021, we believe that continued use of LIBOR in new contracts would create safety and soundness risks, and we will examine bank practices accordingly. It is helpful to think about these separate announcements as essential pieces of a map, which, once put together, provide a complete picture of the path from here to LIBOR's end. When that larger picture comes into focus, I think you can see clearly that we have laid out a sensible way forward that provides certainty while also recognizing the need to address legacy contracts in a way that makes sense in the U.S. context. These announcements areabsolutelynotmeant to support new LIBOR activity or continued business as usual. Instead, they are meant to completely end the new use of LIBOR while allowing a significant portion oflegacycontracts to roll off before the key dollar LIBOR tenors stop publication. Three years ago, the ARRC estimated that there were approximately $200 trillion in outstanding financial contracts using USD LIBOR as a reference rate. The ARRC also estimated that more than 80 percent of those contracts would mature by the end of this year. If market participants had stopped new use of LIBOR at that time, we would today have a considerably smaller amount of legacy LIBOR contracts. Instead, despite the warnings of the official sector concerning LIBOR, use of USD LIBOR has actually increased in the intervening years. As a result, the ARRC now estimates that there are currently almost $223 trillion in financial contracts based on USD LIBOR. Many of those contracts have better fallback language than was once the case; the ARRC has spent considerable time in recommending more robust fallback language for new LIBOR cash products, and ISDA has now published its IBOR protocol, which has allowed market participants to incorporate more robust fallbacks into legacy derivatives. Still, given the sheer size of current exposures, we cannot afford to ignore the problems that an abrupt cessation of USD LIBOR would cause. The path we have laid out—ending new use of LIBOR while providing further time for existing contracts to mature—will give businesses, consumers, and all parties to a contract more certainty that they can count on the original terms of a legacy contract until mid-2023. The ARRC's updated estimates indicate that 67 percent of current LIBOR exposures will mature before mid-2023.iAlthough more would roll off if the end date was further off, the IBA has stated clearly that it will not have sufficient panel bank submissions after June 2023 to publish LIBOR on a representative basis. June 2023 represents a realistic outcome that will allow the majority of outstanding contacts to mature. Of course, we will also be left with the 33 percent of contracts that will not mature before mid-2023, an estimated $74 trillion in financial contracts.iSome of these contracts should already have workable fallback language, but many still have no effective means to replace LIBOR upon its cessation. We continue to believe that legislation is a necessary step to address these contracts. The ARRC has proposed legislation with the state of New York, which may be appropriate given that many of the contracts that the ARRC's proposal seeks to address are governed by New York law. Members of Congress are also considering federal legislative solutions, and we support these efforts as well. Of course, although it is vital, we cannot take any legislative solution for granted until it becomes law. The continued publication of LIBOR will help provide more time to make sure that we are fully ready with the necessary solutions when LIBOR stops. It will also potentially allow other jurisdictions more time to craft their own legislative proposals. The European Union has already passed legislation that is similar to the ARRC's proposals. The United Kingdom is considering legislation that would grant the FCA powers to require IBA to produce a synthetic LIBOR, and the FCA has said that it will consult on using these powers to require IBA to produce synthetic sterling LIBOR and Japanese yen LIBOR rates. For legacy LIBOR contracts governed by U.S. law, we believe that a U.S. legislative solution, be it in New York or at the federal level, represents the best solution. I should stress that no one should assume that there will be a synthetic USD LIBOR. Having talked about the end game for legacy contracts, let me return to the other key component of the plan, winding down new use of dollar LIBOR. Earlier this month, the Federal Reserve Board issued supervisory letter SR 21-7 instructing examiners to assess supervised institutions' plans to transition away from the use of LIBOR.4This guidance reinforces our supervisory statement from last November (SR 20-27), which highlighted that continued use of LIBOR in new contracts would create safety and soundness concerns after 2021 and highlighted the supervisory focus on firms' ending the issuance of new LIBOR contracts as soon as is practicable and, in any event, by December 31, 2021. SR 21-7 outlines factors that examiners should consider in assessing transition efforts and states that, if supervised firms are not making adequate progress in transitioning away from LIBOR, examiners should consider issuing supervisory findings or taking other supervisory actions. Recognizing that smaller banks generally are less reliant on LIBOR, we have tailored our supervisory approach for community banks and firms under $100 billion in assets. Examiners are looking closely to see whether firms have comprehensively assessed their exposure to LIBOR and, if exposures are sizable and complex, have strong plans in place. Firms should prepare for the LIBOR transition with respect to six key areas: While we will examine against all of these points, what is most important this year is that firms should end new use of LIBOR. The extension of the most-used dollar LIBOR tenors should allow firms to focus in the near term on using alternative rates in new contracts and to deal more intensively with legacy contracts later. Market participants have had many years to prepare for the end of LIBOR, yet over the last few years they have actually increased use of LIBOR. Given the announcements of the FCA and the IBA, that must obviously change this year—that's just the laws of physics—and the firms we supervise should be aware of the intense supervisory focus we are placing on their transition, and especially on their plans to end issuance of new contracts by year-end. Before I turn this over to Tom Wipf and Tushar Morzaria, let me thank them for all of the work that they have done with the ARRC and the Working Group on Sterling Risk-Free Rates. There is more work ahead for both groups, but these announcements lay out a clear framework that will help everyone understand exactly what should now to be done. 1. All of my remarks today represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Financial Stability Board.Return to text 2. Seehttps://assets.bbhub.io/professional/sites/10/IBOR-Fallbacks-LIBOR-Cessation_Announcement_20210305.pdf.Return to text 3. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2027.htm.Return to text 4. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2107.htm.Return to text i. Note: This speech was updated on April 7, 2021. The original version of this speech stated that “The ARRC’s updated estimates indicate that 60 percent of current LIBOR exposures will mature before mid-2023” and was updated to 67 percent; and “Of course, we will also be left with the 40 percent of contracts that will not mature before mid-2023, an estimated $90 trillion in financial contracts” was updated to 33 percent and $74 trillion.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the National Association for Business Economics Virtual 37th Annual Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It has now been a year since the onset of COVID-19 in the United States. The past year has been marked by heartache and hardship, especially for vulnerable communities, as well as by the resilience and extraordinary efforts of Americans everywhere, particularly those on the front lines. The past year has also seen determined efforts on the part of policymakers—public health, fiscal, and monetary—to do what is necessary and stay the course until we return to full strength.1 These determined efforts have contributed to a considerably brighter economic outlook. A comparison between the median of the most recent Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) and the first projection following the onset of the pandemic, in June of last year, highlights the improvement in the outlook. The change in the SEP median suggests an improvement in the projected level of gross domestic product of 6 percent at the end of 2021 and 2022, a decline in the unemployment rate of 2 percentage points at the end of 2021 and 1-1/2 percentage points at the end of 2022, and an upward revision to the headline inflation rate of 0.8 percentage point at the end of 2021 that narrows to a 0.3 percentage point upward revision at the end of 2022.2The expected improvements in the outlook reflect progress on controlling the virus, nearly $3 trillion in additional fiscal support, and forceful and timely support from monetary policy. Although the outlook has brightened considerably, the fog of uncertainty associated with the virus has yet to lift completely, and current employment and inflation outcomes remain far from our goals. The focus on achieved outcomes rather than the anticipated outlook is central to the Committee's guidance regarding both asset purchases and the policy rate. The emphasis on outcomes rather than the outlook corresponds to the shift in our monetary policy approach that suggests policy should be patient rather than preemptive at this stage in the recovery. OutcomesRecent data indicate that activity has picked up this year. After a dip in the final months of 2020, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) stepped up considerably so far this year, and spending on durable goods has been particularly strong. This pattern appears consistent with a quick spend-out from the Consolidated Appropriations Act (CAA) stimulus checks at the turn of the year, particularly among lower-income households that may have previously exhausted the funds provided in the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act).3 Like the spending data, the labor market data turned more positive in January and February following weakness at the end of 2020. Although the unemployment rate has moved down 1/2 a percentage point since December, the K-shaped labor market recovery remains uneven across racial groups, industries, and wage levels.4The employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio for Black prime-age workers is 7.2 percentage points lower than for white workers, while the EPOP ratio is 6.2 percentage points lower for Hispanic workers than for white workers—an increase in each gap of about 3 percentage points from pre-crisis lows in October 2019. Workers in the lowest-wage quartile continued to face staggering levels of unemployment of around 22 percent in February, reflecting the disproportionate concentration of lower-wage jobs in services sectors still sidelined by social distancing.5The leisure and hospitality sector is still down almost 3.5 million jobs, or roughly 20 percent of its pre-COVID level. This sector accounts for more than 40 percent of the net decline in private payrolls since February 2020. Overall, with 9.5 million fewer jobs than pre-COVID levels, we are far from our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. Inflation similarly remains far from the goal of 2 percent inflation on average over time. Both headline and core PCE inflation were below 2 percent on a 12-month basis throughout 2020 and came in at 1.5 percent in January. Finally, while vaccinations are continuing at an accelerating pace, over two-thirds of the adult population have yet to receive their first dose, and there are risks from more contagious strains of the virus, social-distancing fatigue, and vaccine hesitancy.6 OutlookAs the economy reopens, the potential release of pent-up demand could drive stronger growth in 2021 than we have seen in decades. However, it is uncertain how much pent-up consumption will be unleashed when social distancing completely lifts, and how much household spending will result from the new stimulus and accumulated savings. With PCE accounting for roughly 70 percent of the economy, this uncertainty about consumption spending contributes to uncertainty about activity, employment, and inflation. In part, the outcome will hinge on distributive questions that are imperfectly understood. Households accrued considerable additional savings that led to a $2.1 trillion increase in liquid assets by the end of last year.7Higher-income households appear to have cut back on discretionary services spending over the past year and increased their purchases of durable goods, which may see some satiation going forward. For moderate-income households that are not cash constrained, it is possible there will be a lower near-term spend-out from the American Rescue Plan payments relative to the CAA payments, given that less than 75 days elapsed between the two rounds of payments. Households whose cash flows were improved by the CAA stimulus may save more of the most recent stimulus for precautionary reasons. That said, there is upside risk if a substantial fraction of stimulus payments and accumulated savings are spent in 2021 rather than more slowly over a longer time period. On the other side, there is potential for some leakage abroad if, as anticipated, foreign demand growth in some regions is weaker than in the United States. Imports soared during the second half of last year and grew further in January, even with worsening backlogs at U.S. ports. As port congestion and supply chain bottlenecks ease, international spillovers could lead to some slippage between the increase in domestic demand and resource utilization, which has implications for employment and inflation. In the labor market, as vaccinations continue and social distancing eases, businesses in hard-hit services sectors will increase hiring, accelerating the pace at which workers find employment. The strong and timely support from fiscal as well as monetary policy likely reduced the extent of scarring during the pandemic, which should aid the pace of hiring at in-person services establishments once the virus is well controlled. The speed of further improvement in the labor market following the initial rush of reopening is less clear, however. Some employers may be cautious about significantly increasing payrolls before post-COVID consumption patterns are more firmly established. Others may be implementing measures to stay lean and contain costs. In the December Duke CFO survey, roughly one-half of CFOs from large firms and about one-third of those from small firms reported "using, or planning to use, automation or technology to reduce reliance on labor."8 In addition to greater use of technology, there is likely a significant amount of slack on the participation and part-time margins. The EPOP ratio among workers ages 25 to 54 is still a full 4 percentage points below its pre-COVID level, and the number of workers working part time because they cannot find a full-time job is 1.7 million higher than pre-COVID. Although core and headline PCE inflation came in at 1.5 percent on a 12-month basis in January, the well-anticipated base effects from price declines in March and April of last year will cause inflation to move above 2 percent in April and May. It also seems likely that a surge of demand may be met by some transitory supply bottlenecks amid a rapid reopening of the economy, leading PCE inflation to rise somewhat above 2 percent on a transitory basis by the end of 2021. Entrenched inflation dynamics are likely to take over following the transitory pressures associated with reopening. Underlying trend inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent for many years.9In addition, research suggests that although increasing labor market tightness may show through to wage inflation, the pass-through to price inflation has become highly attenuated.10These results suggest that businesses tend to respond to increased labor costs by reducing margins rather than increasing prices later in the cycle. Thus, as resource utilization continues to tighten over coming years, recent decades provide little evidence to suggest there will be a material nonlinear effect on price inflation. PolicyThe FOMC has communicated its reaction function under the new framework and provided powerful forward guidance that is conditioned on employment and inflation outcomes. This approach implies resolute patience while the gap closes between current conditions and the maximum-employment and average inflation outcomes in the guidance. By focusing on eliminating shortfalls from maximum employment rather than deviations in either direction and on the achievement of inflation that averages 2 percent over time, monetary policy can take a patient approach rather than a preemptive approach. The preemptive approach that calls for a reduction of accommodation when the unemployment rate nears estimates of its neutral rate in anticipation of high inflation risks an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many of the most economically vulnerable Americans and entrenching inflation persistently below its 2 percent target.11Instead, the current approach calls for patience, enabling the labor market to continue to improve and inflation expectations to become re-anchored at 2 percent. One simple illustration of this difference is the way in which FOMC communications under the new framework have shifted market expectations around the conditions associated with the lift off of the policy rate from the lower bound. This shift is suggested by a comparison of the surveys of primary dealers and market participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in the most recently available surveys, in January 2021, and under the prior policy framework, in March 2015. In the January 2021 surveys, the median respondent expected the unemployment rate to be a bit below 4 percent at the time of liftoff, as compared with 5.3 percent in the March 2015 surveys. Similarly, in the January 2021 surveys, the median respondent expected a 12-month headline PCE inflation rate of 2.2 to 2.3 percent at the time of liftoff, as compared to roughly 0.5 percent in the March 2015 surveys. The most recently available surveys suggest that market participants expect policy to look through the rolling off of base effects as well as possible transitory price increases due to short-term supply-demand imbalances. The FOMC has stated that in order to anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent, it seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. This language recognizes that the public's expectations of inflation are linked to the experience of inflation outcomes. In the nine years since the Committee formally defined price stability as annual PCE inflation of 2 percent, the average 12-month PCE inflation reading has been 1.4 percent. Persistently low inflation creates the risk that households and businesses come to expect inflation to run persistently below target and change their behavior in ways that reinforce low inflation.12 With inflation expected to rise above 2 percent on a transitory basis, I will be closely monitoring a dashboard of indicators to assess that inflation expectations remain well anchored at levels consistent with the Committee's objective. These indicators include survey and market-based measures, along with composite measures like the staff's Index of Common Inflation Expectations.13Survey measures have picked up a little but remain around pre-COVID levels. Meanwhile, five- and 10-year TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities)-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up almost 1 percentage point since last summer and are now at levels last seen in 2013 and 2014. These changes likely reflect both the improvement in the anticipated outlook and market participants' understanding of the Committee's new reaction function.14 The overall price-stability objective of achieving inflation that averages 2 percent over time provides an important guidepost for assessing the path of inflation. Along with realized inflation, I will be monitoring a range of average inflation concepts in the literature to assess the path of policy that would be consistent with closing the inflation gap under a variety of make-up strategies.15 While the outlook has brightened considerably, with jobs nearly 10 million below the pre-COVID level and inflation persistently below 2 percent, the economy remains far from our goals, and it will take some time to achieve substantial further progress. By taking a patient approach based on outcomes rather than a preemptive approach based on the outlook, policy will be more effective in achieving broad-based and inclusive maximum employment and inflation that averages 2 percent over time. The combination of patient monetary policy, together with accelerating progress on vaccinations and substantial fiscal stimulus, should support a strong and inclusive recovery as the economy reopens fully. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve for his assistance in preparing this text. These are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Both the June 2020 and the most recent SEP are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. See, for example, the difference in high-frequency indicators of consumer spending between measures of total spending and spending in low-income Zip codes in the weeks following the payment of stimulus under the CAA. Data are available from Opportunity Insights athttps://www.tracktherecovery.org. For further discussion of differing spend-out of COVID stimulus payments for different levels of household wealth, see, for example, Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan,"Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from COVID-19 Stimulus Payments,"Working Paper No 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May, revised October).Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard (2021),"Full Employment in the New Monetary Policy Framework,"speech delivered at the Inaugural Mike McCracken Lecture on Full Employment, sponsored by the Canadian Association for Business Economics (via webcast), January 13; and Lael Brainard (2021),"How Should We Think about Full Employment in the Federal Reserve's Dual Mandate?"speech delivered at the Ec10, Principles of Economics, Lecture, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (via webcast), February 24.Return to text 5. For more information on this analysis, see the box "Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),Monetary Policy Report (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 12–14.Return to text 6. For more information, see the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID Data Tracker, which is available athttps://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker.Return to text 7. According to the Financial Accounts of the United States, liquid assets—defined as the sum of currency, checkable and time and saving deposits, and money market funds—increased by about $2.1 trillion from 2020:Q1 to 2020:Q4. The 2020:Q4 release of the Financial Accounts of the United States is available on the Board's website at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1.Return to text 8. Details on the CFO survey, which is a partnership of Duke University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, can be found on the Richmond Fed's website athttps://www.richmondfed.org/research/national_economy/cfo_survey.Return to text 9. Statistical models estimate that underlying core PCE inflation ranges from one- to four-tenths of 1 percentage point below the 2 percent longer-run target. See the point estimates for 2019:Q2 in table 1 in Jeremy B. Rudd (2020),"Underlying Inflation: Its Measurement and Significance,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18).Return to text 10. See, for example, slide 5 of Ekaterina Peneva (2019)"It's All about the Labor Market," (PDF)presentation at the Brookings Institution (Washington: Brookings, October 3). This presentation is based on work originally done in Ekaterina V. Peneva and Jeremy B. Rudd (2017), "The Passthrough of Labor Costs to Price Inflation,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 49 (December), pp. 1777–802.Return to text 11. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019),"Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 333–75.Return to text 12. See Lael Brainard (2020),"Bringing the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy into Alignment with Longer-Run Changes in the Economy,"speech delivered at "How the Fed Will Respond to the COVID-19 Recession in an Era of Low Rates and Low Inflation," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 1.Return to text 13. See Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020),"Index of Common Inflation Expectations,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2).Return to text 14. Expectations surrounding the rate of inflation at liftoff similarly moved higher following the release of the new framework in the Desk surveys of primary dealers and market participants. See Ryan Bush, Haitham Jendoubi, Matthew Raskin, and Giorgio Topa (2020),"How Did Market Perceptions of the FOMC's Reaction Function Change after the Fed's Framework Review?"Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), December 18.Return to text 15. For instance, even with the strongest SEP inflation projection since the Committee established its 2 percent inflation objective, the median projection from the current SEP is not quite strong enough to generate inflation that averages 2 percent from the time the federal funds rate moved to the lower bound through the end of the forecast horizon, which is a key consideration under a Temporary Price Level Targeting framework. See Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"AEA Papers and Proceedings,vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the 2021 Annual Washington Conference, Institute of International Bankers (via webcast) It has now been one year since the devastating effects of the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic hit our shores, a year marked by heartbreak and hardship.1We look forward to a brighter time ahead, when vaccinations are widespread, the recovery is broad based and inclusive, and the economy fully springs back to life. But we should not miss the opportunity to distill lessons from the COVID shock and institute reforms so our system is more resilient and better able to withstand a variety of possible shocks in the future, including those emanating from outside the financial system. The Dash for CashInvestor sentiment shifted dramatically in the early days of March 2020 with the realization that COVID would disrupt the entire global economy. Short-term funding markets became severely stressed as market participants reacted to the advent of this low-probability catastrophic event. The abrupt repositioning and repricing of portfolios led to a dash for cash, as even relatively safe Treasury holdings were liquidated, volatility spiked, and spreads in Treasury and offshore dollar funding markets widened sharply. Forceful and timely action by the Federal Reserve and other financial authorities was vital to stabilize markets and restore orderly market functioning. Although some parts of the financial system that had undergone significant reform in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis remained resilient, the COVID stress test highlighted significant financial vulnerabilities that suggest an agenda for further financial reform. I will briefly comment on these areas of vulnerability as well as areas where earlier reforms led to greater resilience. Short-Term Funding Market VulnerabilitiesThe COVID shock brought to the fore important vulnerabilities in the systemically important short-term funding markets that had previously surfaced in the Global Financial Crisis. Signs of acute stress were readily apparent in intermediaries and vehicles with structural funding risk, particularly in prime money market funds (MMFs). Indeed, it appears these vulnerabilities had increased, as assets held in prime MMFs doubled in the three years preceding last March. When the COVID shock hit, investors rapidly moved toward cash and the safest, most liquid financial instruments available to them. Over the worst two weeks in mid-March, net redemptions at publicly offered institutional prime MMFs amounted to 30 percent of assets. This rush of outflows as a share of assets was faster than in the run in 2008, and it appears some features of the money funds may have contributed to the severity of the run.2 The run in March forced MMFs to rapidly reduce their commercial paper holdings, which worsened stress in short-term funding markets. Funding costs for borrowers shot up, and the availability of short-term credit at maturities beyond overnight plunged. These markets provide the short-term credit many businesses need to keep operating and meet payrolls. So when short-term funding markets shut down, it can imperil many businesses, too. For the second time in 12 years, a run on MMFs triggered the need for policy intervention to mitigate the effect on financial conditions and the wider economy. To head off the risk of widespread business failures and layoffs, the Federal Reserve took a number of actions, including announcing the Commercial Paper Funding Facility on March 17 and the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility on March 18, 2020. Following the announcement of these facilities, prime MMF redemptions slowed almost immediately, and other measures of stress in short-term funding markets began to ease. The March 2020 turmoil highlights the need for reforms to reduce the risk of runs on prime money market funds that create stresses in short-term funding markets. The President's Working Group on Financial Markets has outlined several potential reforms to address this risk, and the Securities and Exchange Commission recently requested comment on these options.3If properly calibrated, capital buffers or reforms that address the first-mover advantage to investors that redeem early, such as swing pricing or a minimum balance at risk, could significantly reduce the run risk associated with money funds. Currently, when some investors redeem early, remaining investors bear the costs of the early redemptions. In contrast, with swing pricing, when a fund's redemptions rise above a certain level, the investors who are redeeming receive a lower price for their shares, reducing their incentive to run.4Similarly, a minimum balance at risk, which would be available for redemption only with a time delay, could provide some protection to investors who do not run by sharing the costs of early redemptions with those who do. Capital buffers can provide dedicated resources within or alongside a fund to absorb losses and reduce the incentive for investors to exit the fund early. To be sure, domestic money market funds are not the only vulnerable cash-management investment vehicles active in U.S. short-term funding markets. For example, offshore prime money funds, ultrashort bond funds, and other short-term investment funds also experienced stress and heavy redemptions last March. The runs on offshore MMFs that hold dollar-denominated assets like commercial paper underscore the importance of working with international counterparts to increase the resilience of short-term funding markets. We are supporting the work of the Financial Stability Board to assess options for mitigating the vulnerabilities of MMFs globally and report on them later this year. The COVID shock also highlighted the structural vulnerabilities associated with the funding risk of other investment vehicles that offer daily liquidity while investing in less-liquid assets, such as corporate bonds, bank loans, and municipal debt. Open-end funds held about one-sixth of all outstanding U.S. corporate bonds prior to the crisis.iBond mutual funds, including those specializing in corporate and municipal bonds, had an unprecedented $250 billion in outflows last March, far larger than their outflows at any time during the 2007–09 financial crisis. The associated forced sales of fund assets contributed to a sharp deterioration in fixed-income market liquidity that necessitated additional emergency interventions by the Federal Reserve. In assessing possible reforms to address this run risk, swing pricing could be helpful, because it reduces the first-mover advantage for running from a fund by imposing a cost when redemptions are high. Swing pricing has been used for more than a decade in European mutual funds, where it has been shown to slow redemptions in stress events.5In the United States, mutual funds have not adopted swing pricing, in part because of technical obstacles. Treasury Market FunctioningThe COVID shock also revealed vulnerabilities in the market for U.S. Treasury securities. The U.S. Treasury market is one of the most important and liquid securities markets in the world, and many companies and investors treat Treasury securities as risk-free assets and expect to be able to sell them quickly to raise money to meet any need for liquidity. Trading conditions deteriorated rapidly in the second week of March as a wide range of investors sought to raise cash by liquidating the Treasury securities they held. Measures of trading costs widened as daily trading volumes for both on- and off-the-run securities surged. Indicative bid-ask spreads widened by as much as 30-fold for off-the-run securities. Market depth for the on-the-run 10-year Treasury security dropped to about 10 percent of its previous level, and daily volumes spiked to more than $1.2 trillion at one point, roughly four standard deviations above the 2019 average daily trading volume. Stresses were also evident in a breakdown of the usually tight link between Treasury cash and futures prices, with the Treasury cash–futures basis—the difference between prices of Treasury futures contracts and prices of Treasury cash securities eligible for delivery into those futures contracts—widening notably. Selling pressures were widespread, reflecting sales by foreign official institutions, rebalancing by asset managers, a rapid unwinding of levered positions, and precautionary liquidity raising. Available data suggest that foreign institutions liquidated about $400 billion in Treasury securities in March, with more than half from official institutions and the remainder from private foreign investors, at a time when offshore dollar funding markets also experienced acute stress. Domestic mutual funds sold about $200 billion during the first quarter, selling their less-liquid Treasury securities in order to raise cash to meet investor redemptions. Hedge funds reduced long cash Treasury positions by an estimated $35 billion.6 Dealers play a central role in the Treasury market by buying and selling securities and providing financing to investors. Their capacity or willingness to intermediate these flows was strained amid the elevated uncertainty and intense and widespread selling pressure in mid-March. Operational adjustments associated with the rapid move to remote work may also have inhibited intermediation. The acute stresses in the Treasury market necessitated emergency intervention by the Federal Reserve at an unprecedented scale. The Federal Open Market Committee authorized purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) "in the amounts needed" to support smooth market functioning of these markets.7Between March 12 and April 15, the Federal Reserve increased its holdings of Treasury securities by about $1.2 trillion and agency MBS by about $200 billion. The Federal Reserve provided overnight and term repurchase agreement (repo) operations to address disruptions in Treasury financing markets. These actions rapidly restored market functioning, and a variety of indicators had returned to pre-COVID levels by the summer.8 While the scale and speed of flows associated with the COVID shock are likely pretty far out in the tail of the probability distribution, the crisis highlighted vulnerabilities in the critically important Treasury market that warrant careful analysis. A number of possible reforms have been suggested to strengthen the resilience of the Treasury market. For instance, further improvements in data collection and availability have been recommended to enhance transparency related to market participants, such as broker-dealers and hedge funds. Some have suggested that the Federal Reserve could provide standing facilities to backstop repos in stress conditions, possibly creating a domestic standing facility or converting the temporary Foreign and International Monetary Authorities (FIMA) Repo Facility to a standing facility.9Other possible avenues to explore include the potential for wider access to platforms that promote forms of "all to all" trading less dependent on dealers and, relatedly, greater use of central clearing in Treasury cash markets.10These measures involve complex tradeoffs and merit thoughtful analysis in advancing the important goal of ensuring Treasury market resilience. Offshore Dollar Funding MarketsThe global dash for cash also led to severe stress in offshore dollar funding markets, where foreign exchange swap basis spreads increased sharply to levels last seen in the Global Financial Crisis. Foreign banking organizations serve as key conduits of dollar funding for foreign governments, central banks, businesses, nonbank financial institutions, and households.11They hold $14 trillion in dollar-denominated claims—about half of the total global dollar claims of banks. The Federal Reserve and several other central banks responded swiftly to distress in the offshore dollar funding markets by announcing the expansion and enhancement of dollar liquidity swap lines on March 15, followed on March 19 by the reopening of temporary swap lines with the nine central banks that had temporary agreements during the Global Financial Crisis. On March 30, the Federal Reserve introduced a new temporary FIMA Repo Facility to support the liquidity of Treasury securities held by foreign monetary authorities, an important innovation. Following these interventions, foreign exchange swap basis spreads started moving down almost immediately and within a few weeks reached their levels before the COVID shock. Central ClearingThe reforms put in place pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) in response to the previous crisis appear to have supported the resilience of the financial system as it absorbed the COVID shock. Importantly, regulators instituted global reforms to encourage and, in some cases, mandate central clearing after observing the loss of confidence in key banking intermediaries during the Global Financial Crisis associated with the opaque web of bilateral derivatives contracts. As a result, during the COVID turmoil, the greatly expanded scope of central clearing, with the attendant reduction in counterparty and settlement risks, supported the orderly functioning of critical securities and derivatives markets amid sharply increased trading volumes and spiking volatility. Moreover, several central clearing platforms (CCPs) successfully handled problems that emerged at a few smaller market participants, without noticeable spillovers to other markets and institutions. However, as part of the risk controls that are inherent in central clearing, the COVID market turmoil generated exceptionally large flows of cash through CCPs from market participants with mark-to-market losses to those participants with corresponding gains. Furthermore, during the March COVID turmoil, a number of CCPs collected significantly higher financial resources from their members to protect against increased risk as captured by their risk models. These demands for liquidity were met adequately, and the markets operated efficiently and effectively, although the sudden spikes in CCP requirements may have stressed the liquidity positions of some trading firms. And while CCPs performed well during this period of stress, forceful public emergency interventions and the strong capitalization of banks likely mitigated the risks of large clearing member defaults. The COVID-19 shock presents an important opportunity to reflect on lessons learned about central clearing by the public and private sectors. CCPs could consider the effects of the market dysfunction on their liquidity risk-management plans, including their assumptions regarding the ability to raise cash from noncash assets or securities. In addition to reassessing their liquidity planning, CCPs could also assess the tradeoffs between their own risk-management decisions and broader financial stability concerns, particularly in light of how CCPs may have contributed to deleveraging by some market participants in March by the magnitude of the increases in financial resources they collected when trading and volatility spiked. CCPs could assess their margin models, consider improvements to reduce pro-cyclicality, and consider increased transparency to help clearing members anticipate margin calls during periods of volatility. The holistic review by the Financial Stability Board, in which we participate, could provide important insights into these issues.12 Bank Capital and LiquidityThe resilience of the banking sector in response to the COVID shock underscores the importance of guarding against erosion of the strong capital and liquidity buffers and risk-management, resolution, and stress-testing programs put in place pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act. Banks entered the pandemic with strong capital and liquidity buffers, especially those banks whose size and complexity are systemically important. Strong capital and liquidity buffers allowed the banking system to accommodate the unprecedented demand for short-term credit from many businesses that sought to bridge the pandemic-related shortfalls in revenues. Banks' capital positions initially declined because of this new lending and strong provisioning for loan losses but have since risen above their pre-pandemic levels, reflecting better-than-expected loan performance and a reduction in credit provision as well as caps on dividends and restrictions on share repurchases in the past several quarters. Strong capital and liquidity positions will remain important, as banks still face significant challenges—including an environment of higher-than-normal uncertainty. For instance, some sectors of commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loans are more vulnerable than before the crisis. Similarly, net interest margins could remain in the lower part of their historical ranges for some time. Although losses and delinquency rates on bank loans are currently low, performance could deteriorate as borrowers exit forbearance, with particularly hard-hit businesses and households facing arrears on rent and mortgage payments.13Recent developments have been encouraging, but downside risks remain, which could delay recovery and lead to higher losses. Bank resilience benefited from the emergency interventions that calmed short-term funding markets and from the range of emergency facilities that helped support credit flows to businesses and households. While the results of our latest stress test released in December 2020 show that the largest banks are sufficiently capitalized to withstand a renewed downturn in coming years, the projected losses take some large banks close to their regulatory minimums.14According to past experience, banks that approach their regulatory capital minimums are much less likely to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers. It is important for banks to remain strongly capitalized in order to guard against a tightening of credit conditions that could impair the recovery. Cyclical VulnerabilitiesStructural vulnerabilities such as those discussed earlier could interact with cyclical vulnerabilities in the financial system, potentially magnifying the associated risks. Valuations are elevated in a number of asset classes relative to historical norms. After plunging as the pandemic unfolded last spring, broad stock price indexes rebounded to levels well above pre-pandemic levels. Some observers also point to the potential for stretched equity valuations and elevated volatility due to retail investor herd behavior facilitated by free online trading platforms. Risk appetite in credit markets is also elevated, with high-quality investment-grade (IG) corporate debt trading at slightly negative real yields and issuance of leveraged loans returning to 2019 levels. While financial markets are inherently forward-looking, taking into account the prospects of widespread vaccinations and substantial fiscal support, a variety of risks related to the virus could result in a sudden change in investor risk sentiment. This could, for instance, trigger outflows from corporate bond mutual funds and other managed funds with an investor base that is sensitive to fund performance. Commercial real estate prices are susceptible to declines if the pace of distressed transactions picks up or if the pandemic leads to permanent changes in patterns of use—for instance, a decline in demand for office space due to higher rates of remote work or for retail space due to a permanent shift toward online shopping. Debt loads at large nonfinancial firms were high coming into the pandemic and remain so. Measures of leverage at large firms remain near the historical highs reached at the beginning of 2020, with the aggregate book value of debt exceeding 35 percent of assets in the third quarter. A large portion of IG debt is currently at the lowest IG rating, making this debt vulnerable to downgrades. Such downgrades may bring insurers, mutual funds, and other regulated institutional investors closer to internal or statutory thresholds on their holdings of non-IG securities, potentially forcing these institutions to shed assets. Over a longer horizon, changes in the economic environment associated with low equilibrium interest rates, persistently below-target trend inflation, and low sensitivity of inflation to resource utilization could be expected to contribute to a low-for-long interest rate environment and reach-for-yield behavior. In these kinds of environments, it is valuable to deploy macroprudential tools, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, to mitigate potential increases in financial imbalances. The Path AheadThe COVID shock subjected the financial system to an acute stress that necessitated emergency interventions on a massive scale by financial authorities around the world. The COVID turmoil underscores the importance of ensuring the financial system is resilient to a wide range of shocks, including those emanating from outside the financial system. Regulators and international standard-setting bodies have an opportunity to draw important lessons from the COVID shock about where fragilities remain, such as in prime MMFs and other vehicles with structural funding risk. A number of common-sense reforms are needed to address the unresolved structural vulnerabilities in nonbank financial intermediation and short-term funding markets. 1. I am grateful to Namirembe Mukasa and Filip Zikes, as well as David Bowman, Marta Chaffee, Sally Davies, Kurt Lewis, Jennifer Lucier, Patrick McCabe, Travis Nesmith, and Nancy Riley, for their assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Preliminary research by Federal Reserve staff has found that investor withdrawals accelerated as prime funds' liquidity levels fell close to the 30 percent weekly liquid assets threshold, where these funds can impose redemption fees or suspend redemptions temporarily. See Lei Li, Yi Li, Marco Macchiavelli, and Xing (Alex) Zhou (2020), "Liquidity Restrictions, Runs, and Central Bank Interventions: Evidence from Money Market Funds," working paper.Return to text 3. See U.S. Department of the Treasury (2020),Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets: Overview of Recent Events and Potential Reform Options for Money Market Funds(PDF)(Washington: Department of the Treasury); and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2021),"SEC Requests Comment on Potential Money Market Fund Reform Options Highlighted in President's Working Group Report,"press release, February 4.Return to text 4. That is, when a fund's net asset value "swings" down, redeeming investors receive a lower price for their shares.Return to text 5. See Dunhong Jin, Marcin Kacperczyk, Bige Kahraman, and Felix Suntheim (2019),"Swing Pricing and Fragility in Open-Ended Mutual Funds,"IMF Working Paper 19/227 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, November).Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Financial Stability Report(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 7. See the Committee's March 23, 2020, postmeeting statement (quoted text in paragraph 2), which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 8. See Lorie Logan (2020),"Treasury Market Liquidity and Early Lessons from the Pandemic Shock,"speech delivered at the Brookings-Chicago Booth Task Force on Financial Stability (TFFS) meeting, held via videoconference, October 23.Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),"Federal Reserve Announces Establishment of a Temporary FIMA Repo Facility to Help Support the Smooth Functioning of Financial Markets,"press release, March 31; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019),"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee: January 29–30, 2019."Return to text 10. See Treasury Market Practices Group (2019),Best Practice Guidance on Clearing and Settlement(New York: TMPG, July); Darrell Duffie (2020),"Still the World's Safe Haven? Redesigning the U.S. Treasury Market after the COVID-19 Crisis," (PDF)Hutchins Center Working Paper #62 (Washington: Brookings Institute, May); and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2020),"SEC Proposes to Extend Regulations ATS and SCI to Treasuries and Other Government Securities Markets,"press release, September 28.Return to text 11. For a discussion of the importance of liquidity regulation for these operations, see Lael Brainard (2019),"Statement on Proposals to Modify Enhanced Prudential Standards for Foreign Banks and to Modify Resolution Plan Requirements for Domestic and Foreign Banks,"April 8.Return to text 12. See Financial Stability Board (2020),Holistic Review of the March Market Turmoil(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November).Return to text 13. According to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, banks expect demand to strengthen and loan performance to deteriorate for most loan categories over 2021, with the exception of C&I loans to large and middle-market firms. The survey is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos/sloos-202101.htm.Return to text 14. For these reasons, I supported preserving capital at large banks. See Lael Brainard (2020),"Statement [on Rule to Simplify Capital Rules for Large Banks],"March 4, and"Statement [on Stress Tests for 2020],"June 25.Return to text i. Note: This speech was updated on March 31, 2021. The original version of this speech stated that "Funds that invest primarily in corporate bonds saw record outflows in March 2020. These open-end funds held about one-sixth of all outstanding U.S. corporate bonds prior to the crisis."Return to text
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced that the temporary change to the supplementary leverage ratio, or SLR, for depository institutions issued on May 15, 2020, will expire as scheduled on March 31, 2021. The temporary change was made to provide flexibility for depository institutions to provide credit to households and businesses in light of the COVID-19 event.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Economic Club of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (via webcast) Thank you, Doug, and thank you to the members of the Economic Club of Oklahoma for the opportunity to speak about a subject of vital interest to all of us—the outlook for the U.S. economy in 2021. Our nation has made considerable progress since COVID-19 hit the economy with great force a year ago, but we still have further to go, and risks remain.1 As we all know, starting in late February or March of last year, widespread economic and social lockdowns and other effects of the COVID-19 pandemic caused the swiftest and deepest contraction in employment and economic activity since the Great Depression. Money markets, the Treasury market, and other parts of the financial system seized up, and there were fears of another severe financial crisis. The Federal Reserve stepped in quickly to assist, reviving several lending facilities used in the previous crisis and creating several new facilities. We also cut short-term interest rates to near zero and began purchasing large quantities of Treasury and agency securities to help sustain the flow of credit to households and businesses. Congress and the Administration also worked together to provide effective and timely support. Calm was restored in financial markets, and employment and output began growing in May, but it was a very deep hole to fill. Rapid progress over the summer gave way to slower growth over the past winter as COVID-19 infection rates surged. But in recent weeks, with steep declines in virus-related hospitalizations and deaths, the outlook has brightened. Job creation had stalled over the winter months but picked up in February, with an increase of around 380,000 jobs. The pace of vaccinations has accelerated, COVID-related restrictions on economic activity are beginning to ease, and the latest round of stimulus is boosting consumer spending. Despite the news of the spread of more-contagious COVID-19 variants, efforts to increase vaccine shipments and recently announced plans for distribution to the broader public are encouraging and, if successful, give me some confidence that our economic performance will continue to improve quickly over the remainder of the year. My outlook for the economy is broadly in line with the median of projections of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), published following our meeting last week. Most of my FOMC colleagues expect the economy to grow between 5.8 percent and 6.6 percent in 2021, and the median projection is that the unemployment rate will fall to 4.5 percent by the end of the year. My own expectation is for strong growth and a rebound in the labor force participation rate once the economy fully reopens. This would include schools resuming fulltime in-person learning, which would enable parents who reduced their hours or left the workforce to oversee virtual education and childcare to return to fulltime work. As of February, the level of payroll employment is still 9-1/2 million below the pre-pandemic peak and more than 11 million below where it would have been based on the trend before the pandemic. I believe that job creation will continue, but I still see considerable uncertainty about the strength of that improvement and how long it may take to reach the Federal Reserve's maximum-employment goal. I am also concerned that the extended period of economic restrictions will contribute to further business closures. Severe restrictions on mobility and commerce were implemented in many areas to control the spread of the virus, but they came at a very high economic cost. There is some evidence, which I will discuss in a moment, that small businesses fared better in states with less-stringent restrictions. While the headline unemployment rate has continued to fall, the number of people who report being unemployed for more than six months has continued to rise, suggesting a risk of scarring—meaning that some individuals could see an erosion of their skills and their connections to the labor market. Although economic activity in the travel, leisure, and hospitality sectors has continued to lag the recovery, there have been some bright spots elsewhere. Two that are particularly important for Oklahoma are agriculture and energy. Commodity prices for some crops have increased dramatically in the past few months, particularly soybeans and corn, reflecting higher export demand and some limits on global supply. Increased prices are providing better cash flow and improved credit terms for farmers. Agricultural manufacturers and other suppliers are reporting order backlogs through the summer months, and there are some reports of firmer or increased prices for farmland. Meanwhile, the recent surge in oil prices has returned West Texas Intermediate back up near the levels of early 2020, when it began to fall sharply. The rebound in prices reflects the improved outlook for the global economy given significant progress toward widespread vaccinations in many countries. This recovery has not had a dramatic effect yet on businesses engaged in or supporting oil and gas extraction, but there are signs of a turnaround. So far this year, retail gasoline prices have been rising sharply, and the North American rig count is now the highest it has been since last April. But in contrast to the broadening improvements in many sectors of the economy, an area I continue to be concerned about is the outlook for U.S. businesses, particularly small businesses, which have borne the brunt of the effects of the pandemic. We are now more than a year into the pandemic, and many small businesses are continuing to struggle in their efforts to remain open. Recently, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) released counts of business closures for the second quarter of last year, when most face-to-face businesses were largely shuttered.2In that quarter, the closure rate for establishments showed a sharp increase to 9 percent, compared with an average of about 5 percent during 2019. As part of the fiscal stimulus package passed in June last year, the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) and other government supports helped many businesses withstand the extended period of inactivity over the spring and summer. Many of the shuttered businesses were at least partially reopened in the second half of last year. But as virus cases surged toward the end of 2020, many state and local governments reimposed restrictions on business activity, and others postponed plans to lift their existing restrictions. Even today, more than a year later, some sectors, like restaurants, leisure, and tourism, are continuing to face major effects from pandemic-related social distancing, forced closures, and capacity limits. These restrictions may have been helpful in containing the pandemic, but they appear to have disproportionately impeded small firms' ability to maintain their operations and revenue sources, leading to substantial cash flow pressures. Small businesses will be helped in the near term with a new round of PPP lending, which included adjustments to terms that will make forgiveness of these loans less onerous than before. Even with this, financial pressures on many small businesses remain acute, and I am concerned that a growing number of small businesses have already been closed permanently or are on the verge of failure. The BLS data are not yet available beyond the second quarter of last year, so, from that source, it's difficult to assess the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in permanent business closures. But research by the Board's staff using nontraditional data sources finds that, in 2020, business exits were especially elevated among small firms and particularly in industries most sensitive to social distancing.3The authors found that the permanent exit rate of restaurants in 2020 was about 50 percent higher than average historical rates. On a related note, I would emphasize that, up to this point, the national data on business loan delinquencies and bankruptcy filings have not been especially concerning. That said, small businesses are often unincorporated, and many go under without declaring bankruptcy or defaulting on loans. In fact, many small business owners rely on credit cards or home equity loans for financing, so their failure to make timely payments would not be reflected in data on business loan delinquencies. Elsewhere, evidence of small business finance fragility is shown in Federal Reserve survey data. In the latest reading from the Small Business Credit Survey conducted in October 2020, 80 percent of firms reported seeing a decline in revenue over last year, and two-thirds of those reported declines of at least 25 percent. Since then, there have been indications that things have gotten worse. For example, in February, survey data from the National Federation of Independent Business indicate that a net majority of small businesses reported declines in earnings over the past three months, and a net majority expect their sales to worsen over the next three months. These economic data align with conversations that I have had with bankers across the country, which consistently point to the emerging credit challenges among small and medium-sized businesses as a major source of concern. Bankers note that the substantial support from the Paycheck Protection Program and other fiscal policies have postponed, but not eliminated, these financial pressures. The bankers I speak with have also noted that, while monetary policy has successfully delivered favorable borrowing conditions, many firms are reluctant to take on debt or additional borrowing because of the highly uncertain business climate. Recent data from the from the Fed's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices tell a similar story: The January edition of that survey showed a majority of banks reporting weaker demand for commercial and industrial loans to firms of all sizes. The sharp, and largely voluntary, pullback in consumer spending that followed the onset of the pandemic was undoubtedly a major trigger for the financial struggles that businesses are now facing. But in addition, there is evidence that the economic restrictions imposed by many state and local governments have played a role in the deteriorating health of small businesses. Using data from the Small Business Pulse Survey conducted by the Census Bureau, the Board's staff found that, in states with tighter restrictions on business activity, small firms were more likely to report large declines in their business operations. Firms in relatively restrictive states were also more likely to report that they expect to operate at reduced capacity for an extended period, and they were more likely to expect to need financial assistance in the next six months. While obviously not conclusive, the visible relationship between state-level economic restrictions and small business damage is both striking and concerning. You may be tempted to ask why I am so focused on small businesses. For one, it is because the roughly 32 million small businesses in the United States comprise an important source of job growth in the macroeconomy, and they have an outsized impact on their local communities. Over the past decade, small businesses created 10.5 million net new jobs, accounting for roughly two-thirds of overall net new job creation. This, as I see it, is why the potential for a wave of small business failures is one of the main risks to my expectation that our economy will make further substantial progress toward our goal of full employment. Moreover, from my vantage point as a former community banker, I see other potential negative consequences: Because small businesses often form the backbone of the communities where they are located, their disappearance could have profound and long-lasting community-level effects as well. As I look further down the road, there are some tentative signs that the pickup in overall economic activity will eventually bring an improvement in conditions for small businesses. For example, the latest responses to the same Small Business Pulse Survey I mentioned earlier now indicate that expectations of small business failures—which were quite high during most of 2020—have dropped noticeably and are now tracking below the average rate of failures observed over the five years preceding the pandemic. I spoke earlier about employment, and I will now turn to the price-stability side of the Fed's mandated goals for monetary policy. In recent months, we have seen consumer price inflation moving up, and I anticipate that the 12-month rates in the next few months will very likely track above our 2 percent benchmark as the unusual softness in prices that we saw in April and May last year drops out of the calculation. The marked rise in food prices over the past 12 months has also pushed up the headline measures of price inflation. For many other categories of consumer goods, high order backlogs and tight supplies of key production inputs—like lumber and semiconductors—as well as logjams at the nation's ports and a shortage of truck drivers are likely to push up prices over the next several months. But I expect that these pricing pressures will be temporary, easing over the course of this year as supply bottlenecks are gradually resolved. Beyond this year, some observers have expressed concern that a rapid recovery in aggregate demand amid substantial fiscal support and accommodative monetary policy could lead to undesirably high inflation. While I expect that the stronger economy will push up inflation somewhat, let me explain why I do not expect pricing pressures to be excessive and why I believe the Federal Reserve is likely to continue supporting the economy for some time through accommodative monetary policy. Here I will point to what has in the past seemed to be a relationship between inflation and unemployment, known as the Phillips curve. Over the past several decades, despite large swings in unemployment, inflation has been extremely stable. As an example, up to the beginning of the pandemic, when the economy was growing and unemployment was at a 50 year low of 3.5 percent, inflation was still very low and stable. Economists often attribute this so-called flat Phillips curve to the fact that individuals' inflation expectations are well anchored and unlikely to respond to short-term pricing movements. Survey data on long-run inflation expectations tend to back up this idea. They have been remarkably stable over the past decade, and, although they declined moderately during the middle of last year, most measures have edged up again in recent months and now stand roughly at the levels observed during the pre-pandemic period. With all of that said, given our lack of historical experience with both this level of substantial fiscal stimulus and highly accommodative monetary policy, my outlook for inflation is fairly uncertain. When making monetary policy decisions, we would be concerned about a significant increase in inflation above our 2 percent goal that was sustained for some time. But as my Fed colleagues and I have said many times, monetary policy is not on a preset course. I will continue to monitor economic developments carefully, and, if my outlook for inflation were to change materially, my assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy would change as well. I will wrap up by noting that the economy has made great progress since last spring, and I am optimistic that will continue in 2021, but we still have significant ground to make up and new strains of COVID-19 could slow progress in containing the pandemic. Last year's sharp contraction in economic activity was like nothing we had seen before, and we are still assessing its impact. One unresolved question, in my mind, is how resilient small businesses will prove to be after the extended period of reduced activity. What does all of this mean for the outlook for monetary policy? As we indicated in the policy statement released last week, my FOMC colleagues and I expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until employment and inflation achieve levels consistent with our maximum employment and inflation goals. At this point, the economy is still a long way from those goals. We are making progress, but I think it will take some time for us to get there. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my Federal Open Market Committee colleagues. I would also like to acknowledge the valuable contributions of Federal Reserve staff member Wendy Dunn.Return to text 2. The BLS counts an establishment as "closed" if it reports no employment (or does not report at all) in the third month of the quarter after reporting positive employment in the third month of the previous quarter. The BLS will eventually categorize closed businesses as "deaths" if they stay closed for four quarters. In recent years, the annual establishment death rate has been around 8.5 percent.Return to text 3. See Leland Crane, Ryan Decker, Aaron Flaaen, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz (2020),"Business Exit during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Non-Traditional Measures in Historical Context,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-089 (Washington: Board of Governors, October).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) IntroductionThank you for inviting me today. It's an honor and a pleasure to speak here at the Peterson Institute, a group that has driven much of the most important discussion of international economic issues over my entire working life. I only wish that we could all gather in person—perhaps soon. A little over 420 years ago, a crowd-pleasing local fabler on a lightly populated island in the North Atlantic made popular a phrase that has entered into our language: "Beware the Ides of March." Caesar ignored the soothsayer, and the results weren't good; if recent history is any indication, perhaps we should keep the warning in mind as well. In March 2008, we witnessed a significant domino fall in a chain of events that sparked the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) with the collapse and sale of Bear Stearns. March of the following year saw the nadir of the Dow Jones average—a 50 percent drop from just over a year earlier. And the margin calls and liquidity crunch in March of 2020, was a salient echo of the other significance of the Ides of March for the Romans: the deadline for settling debts, which have had an unsettling habit of coming due in March in our recent financial history. Indeed, this time last year, both domestically and internationally, the financial regulatory community fortified itself as COVID-19 and related containment measures spread across the globe, what I refer to as the COVID event. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) moved into high gear, holding weekly, and even daily, meetings with the most senior leaders of central banks, finance ministries, and market regulators—to share information and shape a synchronized global approach to the financial stability challenges at hand. This ability to spring into action on short notice is exactly why the FSB was established in the wake of the GFC. Its mandate, to promote international financial stability by coordinating the development of regulatory, supervisory, and other financial sector policies, at a global level, reflected a recognition of the growing interconnectedness across our markets and economies. My focus today will be on the future and the challenges we face going forward—in particular, nonbank financial intermediation, or NBFI, and cross-border payments. These are only a portion of the FSB's comprehensive work plan, but they are priority areas that will have significant impact on the financial landscape going forward. NBFI: Vulnerabilities, Interconnection, and Improving ResilienceDeveloping an NBFI PerspectiveSince the GFC of 2008, the NBFI sector has grown and evolved considerably, accounting for almost half of all global financial assets at the start of the COVID event. With this growth has come greater interconnectedness and complexity in intermediation chains. Even before the market turmoil of last March, the need to understand the vulnerabilities arising from the banking sector as well as those risks that have moved outside the banking system was viewed as critical to achieving and maintaining financial stability. The March market turmoil helped focus our attention on NBFI and pushed the FSB to give further priority to work in this area. Because of the way this diverse sector is structured, developing an NBFI perspective requires bringing together regulatory, supervisory, and market perspectives and taking a broad view of how our financial ecosystem works. Even ahead of the COVID event, in my role as chair of the FSB, I formed a high-level group of central bankers and market regulators to oversee and coordinate work on NBFI—which, by March, was clearly a fortunate decision. Under direction of this senior group, the FSB carried out itsHolistic Review of the March Market Turmoil(Holistic Review), which examined not only how different sectors of the market were affected, but also how these effects were transmitted throughout the system and which aspects of the financial system structure may have amplified stress.1 FSB Focus on March Market Turmoil and Needed Next StepsThe Holistic Review underscored how vulnerabilities in the financial system amplified the economic shocks of the COVID event. In particular, it highlighted the dependence of the system on readily available liquidity, and vulnerabilities if liquidity strains emerge—in money market mutual funds (MMFs) and open-end funds, through margin calls and in core bond markets. Importantly, it provides a high-level view on how these parts of the financial ecosystem operate and transmit risk while under stress. In my view, one of the most significant findings relates to MMFs. The Holistic Review documented how the extremely high demand for liquidity, combined with a flight-to-safety, triggered a "dash for cash" that hit institutional prime money market funds particularly hard. In the US, prime MMFs publicly offered to institutional investors had outflows of roughly $100 billion, or 30 percent of the funds' assets, over two weeks in mid-March. This was a faster run, in terms of the percentage of fund assets redeemed, than during the turmoil in September 2008. Similar patterns were also seen in Europe, particularly for US dollar-denominated MMFs. Other funds that are active in short-term funding markets, such as ultrashort bond funds, also saw unprecedented outflows in March. The March market turmoil is the second time in roughly a decade that we have witnessed destabilizing runs on MMFs. More concerning this time, however, is that we had taken steps between these events precisely to reduce the likelihood of such runs. The FSB will publish a report in July for consultation that will set out consequential policy proposals to improve MMF resilience. The proposals should also reduce the likelihood that government interventions and taxpayer support will be needed to halt future MMF runs. This work will also consider the relationship between MMFs and short-term funding markets, with a particular focus on commercial paper and certificate of deposit markets and the impact of dealer behavior. Continued work on other open-end funds, margining and bond market structure, and liquidity will come on the heels of the MMF deliverables. As a first step, the focus will be on enhancing our understanding of vulnerabilities that could emanate from these sectors, including risk transmission channels. Addressing systemic risk in a dynamic sector that continues to evolve is no small feat. I expect policy-related discussions and recommendations to follow the analytical work, though that will likely extend past this year. Although my time is limited to provide more detail, I would like to note that the disruptions in bond markets also raised questions about the role of leveraged investors and the willingness and capacity of dealers to intermediate in times of stress. Work is underway to gather data and analyze dealer behavior to develop a comprehensive view on their impact on financial market functioning and determine whether policy responses are necessary. Turning to a different part of our NBFI work plan, the March market turmoil demonstrated the benefits that central clearing brings for global financial stability. Indeed, central counterparties (CCPs) demonstrated resilience during this tumultuous period. Given their systemic importance, however, we continue to advance work to improve CCP resilience and resolvability, as set out in the FSB 2020 resolution report. I am coordinating with the Chairs of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), International Organization of Securities Commissions, and the FSB Resolution Steering Group on shaping these details. We expect to launch a workstream this year aimed at further strengthening the resilience and resolvability of CCPs in default and non-default loss scenarios, including assessing whether any new types of resources would be necessary to enhance CCP resolvability. The FSB and other standard-setting bodies have also begun work on margin activity in centrally cleared and non-centrally cleared markets during the peak of the market volatility last year. We observed that margin calls by some CCPs may have been larger than expected. While we need to ensure that CCPs are sufficiently margined as critical nodes in the financial system, clearing members and their clients also need sufficient transparency and predictability to be able to manage their exposures. Looking Forward: NBFI Next Steps and Needed ComponentsTo be successful, this broad and comprehensive agenda, which serves as a cornerstone of the FSB work program for 2021 and beyond, will require strong coordination, commitment, and resources from the international regulatory community, including at the FSB and other standard-setting bodies. Further, to ensure a sound, practical, and effective way forward, these workstreams will also require transparency and engagement among the public. The FSB is, therefore, seeking the input of market participants and other parties. This NBFI work alone would be an ambitious agenda. But I believe the FSB is well equipped to address this challenge while also furthering the other important elements of our broad agenda. Let me spend some time talking about another of these important objectives: enhancing cross-border payments. Enhancing Cross-border PaymentsIn 2019, the G20 identified enhancing cross-border payments as a key priority and the FSB has been dedicated to advancing this important work ever since. The challenges associated with cross-border payments are widely known and longstanding. Prior attempts to make improvements have struggled to gain traction. In October 2020, the FSB delivered a multi-year roadmap to the G20 leaders who endorsed the way forward and committed to advancing meaningful change aimed at increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of cross-border payments.2 Ultimately, we are focused on addressing the core challenges associated with cross-border payments: cost, speed, accessibility, and transparency. It goes without saying that making improvements is easier said than done. Frictions underlying existing processes span multiple legal, operational, processing, technological, and structural issues, which can differ greatly by region. To break down the magnitude of our task, the roadmap includes a set of practical actions designed to address specific topics, which we refer to as "building blocks." We are taking a comprehensive approach and engaging the public and private sectors because both need to be a part of the solution if we are to achieve the ambitious goals we have set for ourselves. To begin, we must decide what the actual improvements are that we want to see, and how we will monitor our progress in achieving them. These decisions will define the level of ambition, create accountability and shape how the roadmap is operationalized at the global, regional, and national levels. As a first step, the FSB has formed a task force that is responsible for setting specific, quantitative targets. These targets will set the tone and pace for work that follows and are therefore among the most important deliverables the FSB will complete this year. We plan to publish a consultative paper in May and deliver a final set of targets to the G20 in October. Several groups are charged with advancing one or more building blocks over the course of this year, with the FSB providing annual updates to the G20. To deliver the roadmap, we are collaborating closely with the Committee on Payments and Markets Infrastructures of the Bank for International Settlements, which has a key role given the position of central banks in the payments ecosystem. In addition to setting targets, the FSB is leading multiple elements of the roadmap, advancing those building blocks that are more exploratory in nature, for example, the soundness of global stablecoin arrangements. On this particular topic, last year, the FSB issued high-level recommendations for the regulation, supervision, and oversight of global stablecoins, and we will report to the G20 this year on the progress achieved at both international and national levels. By their nature, cross-border payments are global and involve many other countries outside of the G20 membership. We must therefore be inclusive in our approach, while remaining well organized to meet the milestones we have set for ourselves. To this end, we have partnered with the World Bank and International Monetary Fund given their respective missions and global reach. It will also be important to engage with financial institutions, service providers, industry groups, practitioners, and academics as we advance this work. We plan to communicate information and seek feedback through public consultations, conferences, and bilateral and multilateral outreach. The roadmap sets our path, but the practical reality is, we need consensus among, and action by, many different—even competing—stakeholders to achieve success. We have purposely built into the roadmap opportunities to course correct because we expect to learn more as we go. The FSB will report annually to the G20 Summit and the public, sharing progress and seeking confirmation on the next steps for this immensely important and ongoing work. Other Key Financial Stability Items for 2021What I have just discussed covers a large portion of the FSB's 2021 work plan, but I would be remiss if I did not mention a few other significant areas. We are, of course, continuing to closely monitor vulnerabilities stemming from the COVID event, including the rise in nonfinancial sector debt and measures of bond and equity market valuations. In April, the FSB will report on key considerations involved in amending or unwinding COVID-19 support measures, as appropriate. The FSB will play an important role once unwinding measures begin, given its work to support international information sharing on COVID-19 policy responses. The FSB also plans to assess initial lessons learned from the COVID event for financial stability and share them with the G20 in July. The COVID event has underscored the financial sector's susceptibility to operational risks especially those related to cybersecurity. The speed of technological change and a growing reliance on third-party, technology-based services is increasingly introducing new risks and vulnerabilities to the sector. To begin to address this, the FSB is focused on achieving greater convergence in areas such as regulatory reporting of cyber incidents, and we will deliver those recommendations to the G20 in October. Banking Reforms—anAssessment to DateNext month, the FSB will release the final report of its most ambitious evaluation of the effects of post-GFC banking reforms. The report on too-big-to-fail (TBTF) reforms is the FSB's most analytically rigorous evaluation carried out to date. When looking at these reforms, indicators of systemic risk and moral hazard moved in the right direction, and effective TBTF reforms seem to have brought net benefits. In fact, at the beginning of the COVID event, we observed a far more resilient banking sector than that which entered the 2008 crisis. Yet, if the benefits of TBTF reforms are to be fully realized, there remains further work to do. The FSB outlines this work in its forthcoming evaluation. Further analysis of such reforms, international financial standards, agreed G20 and FSB commitments, recommendations, and other initiatives will provide us with better insights into whether the reforms are working as intended or conflict with one another, are structured efficiently, and if they are in need of refinement. Transitioning Away from London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)One last particular item to mention: LIBOR. Transitioning away from LIBOR is a significant undertaking that the FSB has been engaged in for almost a decade. The FSB set forth a roadmap for clear actions that financial firms and their clients can take to ensure a smooth transition away from LIBOR.3This year, the FSB will report to the G20 on ongoing progress and issues related to the LIBOR transition, including supervisory issues related to the benchmark transition. ConclusionWe faced a confluence of events over the past year that demanded international coordination in several key areas, and that is precisely why the FSB was created more than ten years ago; a beacon at the end of another fateful March. The span of territory and topics covered can admittedly seem bewildering at times—I've covered only a few of them today. Yet as the FSB builds its agenda for each coming year, the process is much like a pointillist painting. Each topic, viewed by itself is a series of complex data points—but, upon stepping back, we see the connection and interdependence of the various elements. The role of the FSB is to orchestrate a unified image and coherent approach; to ensure we continually monitor and address those hazards, the shape and form we have already identified, while allowing for vicissitudes like the COVID event, which arise quickly, with little notice, and that require extra space on the canvas. There is little margin for error in our work. Achieving our objectives requires the utmost in diplomacy and rigorous analysis. In light of all the challenges we have faced over this extraordinary year, I am proud of what my colleagues in the FSB have done. My fellow public servants from across the globe working on FSB topics are steadfast in their daily pursuit of a unified mission—to promote international financial stability. I think the work we have laid out for 2021 does just that. 1. Financial Stability Board,Holistic Review of March Market Turmoil(PDF)(Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 17, 2020).Return to text 2. See Financial Stability Board,Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Stage 3 Roadmap(PDF)(Basel: Financial Stability Board, October 13, 2020).Return to text 3. See Financial Stability Board,Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks: 2020 Progress report(PDF)(Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 20, 2020).Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) By way of introduction, I spent the first part of my career as an economics professor and researcher. One of my main fields of inquiry was monetary policy theory. I have long been a strong believer in the virtues of central bank independence, and today I will devote my remarks to that topic.1 As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, tremendous monetary and fiscal measures have been taken to provide economic relief to American households and businesses. The Federal Reserve took a host of actions, including lowering its policy rate to zero and purchasing securities to support market functioning and provide monetary accommodation.2The Congress enacted several packages that funded the health response to the pandemic, expanded unemployment insurance, and provided economic assistance payments to households and businesses.3 The virus also created uncertainty and turbulence in financial markets, which led the Federal Reserve to establish emergency lending programs to serve as lending backstops and support the flow of credit to households, businesses, nonprofits, and state and local governments.4Establishing these programs under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act required substantial cooperation between the Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. The Congress has provided spending of roughly $5.8 trillion during the past year to deal with the pandemic and its effects on the economy.5This action has pushed the ratio of publicly held U.S. debt to nominal gross domestic product to more than 100 percent for the first time since World War II.6The Federal Reserve's holdings of U.S. government debt has risen to around $7 trillion, with about $2.5 trillion of that total resulting from its asset purchase program aimed at smoothing credit market functioning and providing monetary accommodation. Because of the large fiscal deficits and rising federal debt, a narrative has emerged that the Federal Reserve will succumb to pressures (1) to keep interest rates low to help service the debt and (2) to maintain asset purchases to help finance the federal government. My goal today is to definitively put that narrative to rest. It is simply wrong. Monetary policy has not and will not be conducted for these purposes. My colleagues and I will continue to act solely to fulfill our congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) determines the appropriate monetary policy actions solely to move the economy towards those goals. Deficit financing and debt servicing issues play no role in our policy decisions and never will. Chair Powell made this same point in his recent comments to the Economic Club of New York.7My objective today is to reinforce that message. This does not mean, however, that the Treasury and Federal Reserve should never work together. My comments today will focus on the issue of cooperation—on when and how much is beneficial and on the potential costs that should not be overlooked. Let me point out that there are two fronts for interaction between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. The first is what I will call "back office" operations. By this term, I mean the range of fiscal agency services that the Federal Reserve provides to the Treasury by statute.8For example, the Federal Reserve maintains the Treasury's operating account, accepting deposits, paying checks, and making electronic payments on behalf of the Treasury. It provides securities services on behalf of the Treasury, supporting the auction, issuance, and redemption of marketable Treasury securities. It also provides application development and infrastructure support services, assisting in the Treasury's efforts to improve government cash- and debt-management processes. Since the Federal Reserve is the fiscal agent for the Treasury—and to play that role efficiently and at low cost—the Federal Reserve and the Treasury must always work closely together on operations issues. The second form of interaction involves the Treasury and the Federal Reserve working together on certain macroeconomic policy issues. I will discuss two areas where differing degrees of interaction could occur, emergency lending facilities and economic stabilization, and one area where that interaction should not, and does not, occur—debt financing. First, let me talk about emergency lending facilities authorized by section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act.9During a financial crisis or extreme market malfunctioning, cooperation between the fiscal and monetary authorities is imperative. An important role of a central bank is to step in and provide liquidity to ensure market functioning during those "unusual and exigent circumstances."10And under those circumstances, since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the Secretary of the Treasury is required to approve any new programs under the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority. As I mentioned, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury undertook this kind of coordinated response a year ago, as uncertainty about the economic effect of the virus caused markets to begin seizing up. Many section 13(3) facilities were established to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. All of these emergency programs required the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, and many of them were supported by the Treasury's financial backing, using funds specifically appropriated by the Congress for these facilities in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. At times like these, cooperation between the fiscal and monetary authorities strengthens financial stability. A financial crisis is not a time for uncooperative behavior from either side. However, with regard to the second area, economic stabilization, it is imperative that the central bank remain independent from the fiscal authority. There are sizable costs if cooperation turns into fiscal control. To understand this point, consider a situation where the economy is hit with a negative shock that depresses aggregate demand. The Macro 101 textbook policy response we teach students is for the monetary and fiscal authorities to enact stimulative policies to increase aggregate demand. This effort involves fiscal actions, such as increasing spending and cutting taxes, which increase the deficit. The finance ministry's job is to finance the deficit that results from these fiscal policy actions. Greater borrowing by the finance ministry to finance these policies will tend to put upward pressure on interest rates, which crowds out private sector spending. In this textbook example, the monetary authority should respond to this upward pressure on interest rates by adopting a more accommodative policy stance to bring rates back down. From an institutional design viewpoint, what would be the appropriate arrangement to ensure this type of policy response? One obvious solution would be to give the finance ministry control of monetary policy to ensure a coordinated policy response. This logic suggests central bank independence is an impediment to optimal stabilization policy. So why have an independent central bank? Why create an impediment to socially beneficial cooperation? In the situation where monetary policy is under control of the Treasury, and thus the executive branch in the United States, political motivations may influence decisions. To return to my stabilization example, as the economy recovers, with all of the monetary and fiscal stimulus in place, this stimulus may lead to undesirable inflation pressures. The standard monetary policy response is to evaluate the current employment and inflation situations and raise interest rates when deemed appropriate. However, if monetary policy is under the control of the Treasury, then to further juice the economy for short-term political gains, this action could be delayed past the date the central bank would want to raise rates. Consequently, the argument goes that a hot economy may cause substantial inflation pressures that are hard to rein in politically, and which ultimately harm Americans in the longer run. This view is backed up by the political economy literature, which argues that having monetary policy under the control of political authorities may lead to excessive inflation and economic volatility that is not socially optimal.11Put another way, it can lead to an unstable economy, on which households and businesses cannot rely. Subsequent academic research, including mine, focuses on ways in which the central bank could be designed to prevent this undesired outcome from happening.12One of those ways is delegating decisionmaking to a policy committee that is insulated from short-term political pressures. Institutional details that enhance insulation include giving central bankers long terms and prohibiting removal from office for political reasons. This literature provides the theoretical foundations for central bank independence and the importance of central bank credibility. A look across countries is instructive. Operational independence with clearly specified goals for monetary policy has become the norm for central banks in advanced economies, reflecting the consensus that has emerged over the past 30 years concerning the benefits of central bank independence. The Congress was fully aware of the potential misuse of monetary policy for political reasons, and it purposefully created the Federal Reserve as an independent central bank. The design features of the Federal Reserve minimize political influence over monetary policy while still maintaining accountability to the Congress and to the electorate for its policy actions.13 Eventually, in 1977, the Congress mandated that the Federal Reserve conduct monetary policy to effectively promote the goals of maximum employment and price stability. By having monetary policy overseen by independent officials, the incentive to misuse stabilization policy for partisan purposes is reduced. Monetary policymakers can focus on what is best for the economy over the long run.14 Finally, we come to the third area of potential interaction between the central bank and the Treasury: debt financing. When governments run up large debts, the interest cost to servicing this debt will be substantial. Money earmarked to make interest payments could be used for other purposes if interest rates were lower. Thus, the fiscal authority has a strong incentive to keep interest rates low. The United States faced this situation during World War II.15Marriner Eccles, who chaired the Federal Reserve at the time, favored financing the war by coupling tax increases with wage and price controls. But, ultimately, he and his colleagues on the FOMC concluded that winning the war was the most important goal, and that providing the government with cheap financing was the most effective way for the Federal Reserve to support that goal. So the U.S. government ran up a substantial amount of debt to fund the war effort in a low interest rate environment, allowing the Treasury to have low debt servicing costs. This approach freed up resources for the war effort and was the right course of action during a crisis as extreme as a major world war. After the war was over and victory was achieved, the Treasury still had a large stock of debt to manage and still had control over interest rates. The postwar boom in consumption, along with excessively low interest rates, led to a burst of inflation. Without control over interest rates, the Federal Reserve could not enact the appropriate interest rate policies to rein in inflation. As a result, prices increased 41.8 percent from January 1946 to March 1951, or an average of 6.3 percent year over year.16This trend, and efforts by then-Chair Thomas McCabe and then-Board member Eccles, ultimately led to the Treasury-Fed Accord of 1951, which restored interest rate policy to the Federal Reserve. The purpose of the accord was to ensure that interest rate policy would be implemented to ensure the proper functioning of the economy, not to make debt financing cheap for the U.S. government. The upshot of these examples is that cooperation between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury is important to address macroeconomic policy issues. But research shows that, to avoid distortions in using monetary policy for deficit financing, it is important to have an independent central bank with a clear and credible inflation target, which the Federal Reserve does.17Central bank independence is critical for maintaining that target and keeping inflation expectations in line with that target. My message today is that the Federal Reserve and the Treasury should work together at key times and along certain dimensions. Back-office operations are done efficiently and effectively in this manner. And in times of crisis, coordination allows policies to be implemented quickly and forcefully to set the stage for a strong path of recovery. But for this arrangement to work, the political independence of the Federal Reserve is essential—it is the best way for the Federal Reserve to meet its congressional mandate and allow policymakers to meet the longer-term needs of the American people. The Treasury and the Federal Reserve both recognize this necessity and have issued joint statements to this effect in the past.18 With this independence, of course, the FOMC is committed to being accountable and transparent about our actions to both the Congress and the public—and the Federal Reserve strives to continually improve its transparency. In 2020, for example, the FOMC released a new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.19This new framework explains how we interpret the mandate that the Congress has given us and describes the broad framework that we believe will best promote our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Going forward, the monetary policy choices of the FOMC will continue to be guided solely by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. These congressionally mandated goals always drive our decisions; partisan policy preferences or the debt-financing needs of the Treasury will play no role in that decision. Cooperation in times of crisis, like during the initial phases of the COVID crisis, was crucial for staving off an economic disaster, putting us on the road to recovery, and helping avoid long-run scarring and was the appropriate way to serve the Fed's dual mandate. But the independence of the Federal Reserve is in the nation's best interest and should be valued and protected by all. 1. I am grateful to Jane Ihrig for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, the statement issued after the conclusion of the Federal Open Market Committee's March 15, 2020, meeting, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. See, for example, the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020, Pub. L. No. 116-123, 134 Stat. 146 (Mar. 6, 2020); the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, Pub. L. No. 116-127, 134 Stat. 178 (Mar. 18, 2020); the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, Pub. L. No. 116-136, 134 Stat. 281 (Mar. 27, 2020); the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act, Pub. L. No. 116-139, 134 Stat. 620 (Apr. 24, 2020); the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Pub. L. No. 116-260, 134 Stat. 1182 (Dec. 27, 2020); and the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, Pub. L. No. 117-2 (Mar. 11, 2021).Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),"Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Funding, Credit, Liquidity, and Loan Facilities,"webpage.Return to text 5. See Congressional Budget Office (2020), The Effects of Pandemic-Related Legislation on Output (Washington: CBO, September), available athttps://www.cbo.gov/publication/56537; Congressional Budget Office (2021),"Summary Estimate for Divisions M through FF, H.R. 133, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Public Law 116-260, Enacted on December 27, 2020," (PDF)January 14; and Congressional Budget Office (2021),"Estimated Budgetary Effects of H.R. 1319, American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, As passed by the Senate on March 6, 2021," (PDF)summary tables, March 10.Return to text 6. See Congressional Budget Office (2021),The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031(Washington: CBO, February), available athttps://www.cbo.gov/publication/56970; and Congressional Budget Office (2015),An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2015 to 2025(PDF)(Washington: CBO, August), p. 71.Return to text 7. See Jerome H. Powell (2021),"Getting Back to a Strong Labor Market,"speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York (via webcast), February 10.Return to text 8. SeeBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018),"Fiscal Agency Services,"webpage.Return to text 9. See 12 U.S.C. § 343(3).Return to text 10. See section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 343(3)), available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section13.htm(quoted text in paragraph (3)(A)).Return to text 11. See Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott (1977), "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 85 (June), pp. 473–91; Robert J. Barro and David B. Gordon (1983), "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 91 (August), pp. 589–610; and Alberto Alesina (1987), "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated Game,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 102 (August), pp. 651–78.Return to text 12. See Kenneth Rogoff (1985), "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 100 (November), pp. 1169–89; and Christopher J. Waller (1989), "Monetary Policy Games and Central Bank Politics,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 21 (November), pp. 422–31.Return to text 13. An example of a design feature of the Federal Reserve that balances accountability with independence to conduct monetary policy is the provision in the Federal Reserve Act that requires "open market" purchases and sales of Treasury securities (12 U.S.C. § 355). The requirement for purchases and sales to be in the open market makes the Federal Reserve accountable for paying a market price, and, by preventing the Federal Reserve from purchasing directly from the Treasury, it supports the independence of the Federal Reserve in the implementation of monetary policy. For a discussion of various tensions between allowing the Federal Reserve to be independent to conduct policy and also being accountable to the electorate, see Christopher J. Waller (2009),"Why the Fed Is a Well-Designed Central Bank,"in Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis,Annual Report, 2009(St. Louis: FRBSL).Return to text 14. See Michele Fratianni, Jurgen von Hagen, and Christopher Waller (1997), "Central Banking as a Political Principal-Agent Problem,"Economic Inquiry,vol. 35 (April), pp. 378–93.Return to text 15. This history is recounted in Jessie Romero (2013),"Treasury-Fed Accord: March 1951,"Federal Reserve History,November 22.Return to text 16. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021),"Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items in U.S. City Average [CPIAUCNS],"retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March 11.Return to text 17. See, for example,Fernando M. Martin (2015), "Debt, Inflation and Central Bank Independence,"European Economic Review,vol. 79 (October), pp. 129–50.Return to text 18. For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of the Treasury (2009),"The Role of the Federal Reserve in Preserving Financial and Monetary Stability: Joint Statement by the Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve,"joint press release, March 23.Return to text 19. The new statement—released on August 27, 2020, and reaffirmed in January 2021—is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York (via webcast) It has been one year since the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic hit our shores—a year marked by heartbreak and hardship. We are all looking forward to a brighter time ahead, when vaccinations are widespread, the recovery is broad based and inclusive, and services, schools, sports, and social life are in person. The expected path of the U.S. economy has strengthened with the prospect of widespread vaccinations and additional fiscal stimulus, but risks remain, and we are currently far from our goals.1 Current SituationAfter a dark winter with elevated case counts and setbacks on service-sector jobs, case counts have come down and spending is picking up. Economic forecasts for growth during the first quarter have been significantly upgraded in response to the better-than-expected data.2January data for household spending overall came in strong—confirming that the renewal of fiscal support at the end of the year provided a much needed boost to household incomes and spending at the turn of the year. The income support provided by fiscal authorities to hard-hit workers, households, businesses, and states and localities, as well as the actions of the Federal Reserve to promote orderly functioning in financial markets and low borrowing costs for households and businesses, have been providing vital support for the economy. In recent weeks, vaccinations have been increasing, while weekly cases, hospitalizations, and deaths have decreased. The seven-day moving average of daily COVID deaths, which peaked in mid-January, declined about 35 percent during the month of February, although sadly it is still at high levels.3As of yesterday, nearly 77 million vaccination doses had been administered. While the progress on vaccinations is promising, jobs are currently down by 10 million relative to pre-pandemic levels. Improvements in the labor market stalled late last year after rebounding partway in the summer and fall of 2020. When we take into consideration the more than 4 million workers who have left the labor force since the pandemic started, as well as misclassification errors, the unemployment rate is close to 10 percent currently—much higher than the headline unemployment rate of 6.3 percent. Labor force participation by prime-age workers stands lower now, on net, than it did in June after it had bounced back partway from the decline in April.4The decline in labor force participation relative to last June is largely a result of lower participation by prime-age women, which, in turn, partly reflects the increase in caregiving work at home with the move to remote schooling and the shutdown of daycares due to COVID. On average, over the period from November 2020 to January 2021, the fraction of prime-age women with children aged 6 to 17 who were out of the labor force for caregiving had increased by 2.4 percentage points from a year earlier, while for men the fraction had increased by about 0.6 percentage point.5If not soon reversed, the decline in the participation rate for prime‑age women could have scarring effects, with longer-term implications for household incomes and potential growth.6 Roughly 90 percent of the shortfall in private payroll employment relative to the pre-COVID level is concentrated in service-providing industries, with half of these service job losses in leisure and hospitality. The concentration of job losses in services has had a disproportionate effect on the lowest-wage workers. Workers in the lowest-wage quartile face an extremely elevated rate of unemployment of around 23 percent.7The advent of widespread vaccinations should revive in-person schooling and childcare along with demand for the in-person services that employ a significant fraction of the lower-wage workforce. Realized inflation remains low, although inflation expectations appear to have moved closer to our 2 percent longer-run target. Both core and headline measures of 12-month personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation were 1.5 percent in January, well below our longer-run 2 percent inflation goal. Longer-term inflation expectations appear to have moved up in recent months, consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) new commitment to achieving inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Market-based indicators of inflation expectations increased over recent months, with Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities-based measures of inflation compensation over the next 5 years and 10 years rising about 40 and 30 basis points, respectively, since the end of last year. Some survey measures of inflation expectations have also moved up in recent months, although, on balance, they have only moved up toward their pre-COVID levels. In many foreign countries, growth moderated at the end of 2020, as a spike in COVID hospitalizations and deaths led to tighter public health restrictions in many economies. Retail sales and measures of services activity weakened even as manufacturing and exports remained more resilient. Foreign activity should strengthen later this year as vaccinations rise, COVID case counts decline, and social distancing eases. It should also be aided by some rundown in the stock of excess savings, continued fiscal and monetary support, and strong U.S. demand. The turnaround in growth in each country will hinge on success in controlling the virus and limiting economic scarring from the past year's downturn, as well as on available policy space, and underlying macroeconomic vulnerabilities. OutlookSo, what do these developments suggest for the U.S. outlook? Increasing vaccinations, along with enacted and expected fiscal measures and accommodative monetary policy, point to a strong modal outlook for 2021, although considerable uncertainty remains. It is widely expected that we will continue to make progress controlling the virus, reducing the need for social distancing, but variants of the virus, slow take-up of vaccinations, or both could slow progress. Additional fiscal support is likely to provide a significant boost to spending when vaccinations are sufficiently widespread to support a full reopening of in-person services. Various measures of financial conditions are broadly accommodative relative to historical levels and should remain so. The labor market should strengthen, perhaps significantly, as the virus recedes, social distancing comes to an end, and the service sector springs back to life. Inflation is likely to temporarily rise above 2 percent on a 12-month basis when the low March and April price readings from last year fall out of our preferred 12-month PCE measure. Transitory inflationary pressures are possible if there is a surge of demand that outstrips supply in certain sectors when the economy opens up fully. The size of such a surge in demand will depend in part on the effects of additional fiscal stimulus, along with any spend-down of accumulated savings, which are uncertain.8But a surge in demand and any inflationary bottlenecks would likely be transitory, as fiscal tailwinds to growth early this year are likely to transition to headwinds sometime thereafter. A burst of transitory inflation seems more probable than a durable shift above target in the inflation trend and an unmooring of inflation expectations to the upside. When considering the inflation outlook, it is important to remember that inflation has averaged slightly below 2 percent for over a quarter-century. In the nine years since the FOMC's announcement of a 2 percent inflation objective, 12-month PCE inflation has averaged under 1-1/2 percent. Readings of 12-month inflation have been below 2 percent in 95 of those 109 months. According to recent research, statistical models estimate that underlying core PCE inflation ranges from one- to four-tenths of 1 percentage point below our 2 percent longer-run target.9Recall that at the end of 2019, with unemployment at a multidecade low and after the addition of almost 1-1/2 million workers to the labor force during the previous year, PCE inflation was 1.6 percent for the year. Monetary PolicyWith that outlook in mind, let me turn to monetary policy. After an extensive review, the FOMC revised its monetary policy framework to reflect important changes in economic relationships characterized by a low equilibrium interest rate, inflation persistently below target, and low sensitivity of inflation to resource utilization. The new framework calls for monetary policy to seek to eliminateshortfallsof employment from its maximum level, in contrast to the previous approach that called for policy to minimizedeviationswhen employment is too high as well as too low. It emphasizes that maximum employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal assessed by a wide range of indicators. In addition, in order to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent goal, monetary policy will seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Consequently, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. These changes mean that we will not tighten monetary policy solely in response to a strong labor market. The long-standing presumption that accommodation should be reduced preemptively when the unemployment rate nears estimates of the neutral rate in anticipation of high inflation that is unlikely to materialize risks an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many of the most economically vulnerable Americans.10It may curtail progress for racial and ethnic groups that have faced systemic challenges in the labor force. Instead, the shortfalls approach will enable the labor market to continue to improve absent clear indications of high inflationary pressures or an unmooring of inflation expectations to the upside. The FOMC has set out forward guidance on the policy rate and asset purchases that implements the new framework. The guidance indicates an expectation that it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range of the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Even after economic conditions warrant liftoff, changes in the policy rate are likely to be only gradual, as the forward guidance notes that monetary policy will remain accommodative in order to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time. In addition, asset purchases are expected to continue at least at their current pace until substantial further progress has been made toward our goals. In assessing substantial further progress, I will be looking for realized progress toward both our employment and inflation goals. I will be looking for indicators that show the progress on employment is broad based and inclusive rather than focusing solely on the aggregate headline unemployment rate, especially in light of the significant decline in labor force participation since the spread of COVID and the elevated unemployment rate for workers in the lowest-wage quartile and other disproportionately affected groups.11 Likewise, while I will carefully monitor inflation expectations, it will be important to achieve a sustained improvement in actual inflation to meet our average inflation goal. The past decade of underperformance on our inflation target highlights that reaching 2 percent inflation will require patience, and we have pledged to hold the policy rate in its current range until not only has inflation risen to 2 percent but it is also on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Of course, we will be vigilant in parsing the data. Given the path of inflation to date, our framework calls for inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. If, in the future, inflation rises immoderately or persistently above target, and there is evidence that longer-term inflation expectations are moving above our longer-run goal, I would not hesitate to act and believe we have the tools to carefully guide inflation down to target. Today the economy remains far from our goals in terms of both employment and inflation, and it will take some time to achieve substantial further progress. Jobs are still 10 million below the pre-COVID level, and inflation has been running below 2 percent for years. We will need to be patient to achieve the outcomes set out in our guidance. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's GDPNow, which revised up the estimate for first-quarter growth by 5 percentage points on the release of the retail sales data. The latest estimate is 8.8 percent. The GDPNow forecast is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's website athttps://www.frbatlanta.org/cqer/research/gdpnow.Return to text 3. For more information, see the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's COVID data page, which is available athttps://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker.Return to text 4. See the lower panel of figure 3 in Lael Brainard (2021),"How Should We Think about Full Employment in the Federal Reserve's Dual Mandate?"speech delivered at the Ec10, Principles of Economics, Lecture, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (via webcast), February 24.Return to text 5. The percentages are staff calculations based on the microdata from the January Current Population Survey. For more information on this analysis, see the box "Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),Monetary Policy Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 12–14.Return to text 6. See Olivia Lofton, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lily Seitelman (2021),"Parents in a Pandemic Labor Market,"Working Paper 2021-04 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February); and Lael Brainard (2020),"Achieving a Broad-Based and Inclusive Recovery,"speech delivered at "Post-COVID—Policy Challenges for the Global Economy," Society of Professional Economists Annual Online Conference, October 21.Return to text 7. For more information on the analysis on employment by wage quartile, see the box "Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic" in Board of Governors,Monetary Policy Report,in note 5.Return to text 8. For examples of the range of estimates of the effects of the expected fiscal stimulus, see Wendy Edelberg and Louise Sheiner (2021),"The Macroeconomic Implications of Biden's $1.9 Trillion Fiscal Package,"Brookings Institution, January 28; Alex Arnon, Daniela Viana Costa, Zheli He, Austin Herrick, Jon Huntley, Marcos Dinerstein, Victoria Osorio, and John Ricco (2021),"Macroeconomic Effects of the $1.9 Trillion Biden COVID Relief Plan,"Penn Wharton Budget Model (Philadelphia: Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, February 3); and Olivier Blanchard (2021), "In Defense of Concerns over the $1.9 Trillion Relief Plan," RealTime Economic Issues Watch (Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, February 18), https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/defense-concerns-over-19-trillion-relief-plan.Return to text 9. See the point estimates for 2019:Q2 in table 1 in Jeremy B. Rudd (2020),"Underlying Inflation: Its Measurement and Significance,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18).Return to text 10. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019),"Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF)Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 333–75.Return to text 11. See Lael Brainard (2021), "How Should We Think about Full Employment in the Federal Reserve's Dual Mandate?" in note 4.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the 2021 Institute of International Finance Washington Policy Summit, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the 2021 Institute of International Finance (IIF) Washington Policy Summit.1I regret that we are not doing this session in person, but I do hope next time we will be gathering together in Washington. I look forward, as always, to a conversation with my good friend and one-time colleague Tim Adams, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIn the second quarter of last year, the COVID-19 pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at a roughly 31.5 percent annual rate in the second quarter of 2020, more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April, and the unemployment rate rose from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February to almost 15 percent in April. Since then, economic activity has rebounded, and it is clear that the economy has proven to be much more resilient than many forecast or feared one year ago. GDP grew by almost 8 percent at an annual rate in the second half of last year, and private forecasters project that GDP will grow roughly 6 percent—and possibly 7 percent—this year. As shown in the latest Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' projections for 2021 GDP growth is 6.5 percent.2If these projections are realized, GDP will grow at the fastest four-quarter pace since 1984. And, as this is a virtual meeting of the IIF, I would be remiss if I did not highlight that if these projections for U.S. economic activity are realized, rising U.S. imports will serve as an important source of external demand to the rest of the world this year and beyond. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have recently improved. Employment rose by 379,000 in February, as the leisure and hospitality sector recouped about two-thirds of the jobs that were lost in December and January. Nonetheless, employment is still 9.5 million below its pre-pandemic level for the economy as a whole. The unemployment rate remains elevated at 6.2 percent in February, and once one factors in the decline in the labor force since the onset of the pandemic and the misclassification of some workers on temporary layoff as employed, the true unemployment rate is closer to 10 percent. It is worth highlighting that in the baseline projections of the FOMC presented in the latest SEP released last week, my colleagues and I substantially revised up our outlook for the economy, projecting a relatively rapid return to levels of employment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis. In particular, the median FOMC participant now projects the unemployment rate to reach 4.5 percent at the end of this year and 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. With regards to inflation, the median inflation projection of FOMC participants is 2.4 percent this year and declines to 2 percent next year before moving back up to 2.1 percent in 2023. Over the next few months, 12-month measures of inflation are expected to move temporarily above our 2 percent longer-run goal, owing to a run of year-over-year comparisons with depressed service-sector prices recorded in the spring of 2020 and supply bottlenecks limiting how quickly production can respond in the near term. However, I expect most of this increase to be transitory and for inflation to return to—or perhaps run somewhat above—our 2 percent longer-run goal in 2022 and 2023. This outcome would be entirely consistent with the new framework we adopted in August 2020 and began to implement at our September 2020 FOMC meeting.3In our new framework, we aim for inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. This means that following periods when inflation has been running below 2 percent—as has been the case for most of the past decade—monetary policy will aim for inflation to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. And this brings me to the next topic. Recent FOMC Decisions and the New Monetary Policy FrameworkAt our most recent FOMC meetings, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. As announced in the September statement and reiterated in the following statements, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.4We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent, and until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, in our December FOMC statement, the Committee combined our forward guidance for the federal funds rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month untilsubstantial further progresshas been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The changes to the policy statement that we made over the past few FOMC meetings bring our policy guidance in line with the new framework outlined in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee approved last August. In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "shortfalls[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations."5This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it will conduct policy to achieve inflation outcomes that keep long-run inflation expectations anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."6While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—that remain unchanged.7 Concluding RemarksWhile our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so as the recovery progresses, it will take some time for economic activity and employment to return to levels that prevailed at the business cycle peak reached last February. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy until the job is well and truly done to help ensure that the economic recovery will be as robust and rapid as possible. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The most recent SEP is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 4. The statements issued after the September and subsequent FOMC meetings are available, along with other postmeeting statements, on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 5. The most recent version of the 2012 statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_201901.pdf.Return to text 6. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.Return to text 7. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31;and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.Return to text