The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced preliminary results indicating that the Reserve Banks provided for payments of approximately $88.5 billion of their estimated 2020 net income to the U.S. Treasury. The 2020 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in March and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2020 estimated net income of $88.8 billion represents an increase of $33.3 billion from 2019, primarily attributable to a $27.1 billion decrease in interest expense associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions and a $5.3 billion decrease in interest expense associated with securities sold under agreements to repurchase. Net income for 2020 was derived primarily from $100 billion in interest income on securities acquired through open market operations--U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and GSE debt securities, $723 million interest income on securities purchased under agreements to resell, realized gains of $664 million on GSE MBS, and foreign currency gains of $1.5 billion that result from the daily revaluation of foreign currency denominated investments at current exchange rates. The Federal Reserve Banks realized net income of $405 million from facilities established in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Federal Reserve Banks had interest expense of $7.9 billion primarily associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions, and interest expense of $711 million on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, net of amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $4.5 billion in 2020. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $831 million for the costs related to producing, issuing, and retiring currency, $947 million for Board expenditures, and $517 million to fund the operations of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Additional earnings were derived from income from services of $448 million. Statutory dividends totaled $386 million in 2020. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2011 through 2020 (estimated). For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Note: On January 12, 2021, the press release was updated to indicate that the change in 2020 net income was attributable to $5.3 billion decrease in interest expense associated with securities sold under agreements to repurchase (not resell as originally written).
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Mid America Bank and Trust Company, Dixon, MissouriConsent Order, dated October 25, 2017Terminated January 4, 2021 Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that the public comment period has been extended through February 22, 2021, for the application by First Citizens BancShares, Inc. of Raleigh, North Carolina, to acquire CIT Group, Inc. of New York, New York. The comment period is being extended to provide additional time for interested parties to comment on the application in light of the ongoing challenges from the coronavirus. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the approval of the reappointment of 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents and 11 first vice presidents, as previously made by their respective boards of directors.1Each individual has been approved to serve a new five-year term beginning March 1, 2021. Under section 4 of the Federal Reserve Act, all Reserve Bank presidents and first vice presidents serve five-year terms that expire at the end of February in years ending in 1 or 6. Presidents and first vice presidents who take office in intervening years are initially appointed for the remainder of the current term. Class B and C Reserve Bank directors who are not affiliated with a supervised entity are eligible to vote on appointment and subsequent reappointment actions for presidents and first vice presidents. "The leaders of our Reserve Banks play a vital role in supporting the economic health of communities across our country," said Governor Lael Brainard, chair of the Board's Committee on Reserve Bank Affairs. "Over the past year alone, this has been apparent in the many ways they have been engaged in the Federal Reserve's responses to the COVID crisis and the national discussion on systemic inequities. Reflecting these important responsibilities, the eligible Reserve Bank directors, with significant input from the Board of Governors and key stakeholders, have conducted a rigorous process to inform their reappointment decisions." Reappointment decisions by Reserve Bank boards of directors, and subsequent approval by the Board of Governors of such actions, are informed by assessments of various relevant performance dimensions including the ability of their president to effectively lead the Reserve Bank, the president's performance in achieving the Reserve Bank's and Federal Reserve System's objectives, and the president's ability to effectively represent the Federal Reserve to the public. The performance appraisal of the first vice president considers strategic leadership of the Reserve Bank, with a focus on operational capacity and organizational strength, as well as contributions to System initiatives. Class B and C directors represent a wide range of business and community interests that are affected by Federal Reserve policies. They are therefore well-positioned to assess the contributions and impacts of the Bank, its programs, and its leadership across the respective District. In addition, each president's performance is discussed annually by the chair and deputy chair of each Reserve Bank board and the Board of Governors' Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs, and the performance of each first vice president is discussed by that group and the Bank's president. A list of presidents and first vice presidents, by Federal Reserve District, follows: Boston: Eric S. Rosengren, president, and Kenneth C. Montgomery, first vice president New York: John C. Williams, president Philadelphia: Patrick T. Harker, president, and James D. Narron, first vice president Cleveland: Loretta J. Mester, president, and Gregory L. Stefani, first vice president Richmond: Thomas I. Barkin, president, and Becky C. Bareford, first vice president Atlanta: Raphael W. Bostic, president, and André T. Anderson, first vice president Chicago: Charles L. Evans, president, and Ellen J. Bromagen, first vice president St. Louis: James B. Bullard, president, and Kathleen O. Paese, first vice president Minneapolis: Neel T. Kashkari, president, and Ron J. Feldman, first vice president Kansas City: Esther L. George, president, and Kelly J. Dubbert, first vice president Dallas: Robert S. Kaplan, president, and Meredith N. Black, first vice president San Francisco: Mary C. Daly, president, and Mark A. Gould, first vice president For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. 1. Michael Strine, first vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, previously announced his retirement at the conclusion of his current term on February 28, 2021. A search for his successor is now underway (https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/aboutthefed/2020/20201020).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday finalized a rule that updates the Board's capital planning requirements to be consistent with other Board rules that were recently modified. The final rule is generally similar to the proposal. In 2019, the Board finalized a framework that sorts large banks into different categories based on their risks, with requirements that are tailored to the risks of each category. The Board's capital planning requirements for these large banks help ensure they plan for and determine their capital needs under a range of different scenarios. The rule finalized today reflects that new framework. In particular, firms in the lowest risk category are on a two-year stress test cycle and not subject to company-run stress test requirements. In a change from the proposal, the final rule applies capital planning requirements to large savings and loan holding companies that are not predominantly engaged in insurance or commercial activities. Federal Register notice: Amendments to Capital Planning and Stress Testing Requirements for Large Bank Holding Companies, Intermediate Holding Companies and Savings and Loan Holding Companies Board Memo: Draft final rule to conform the Board's capital planning and related stress testing requirements to its prudential standards tailoring framework (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition against Carolyn E. FlynnFormer employee Community Financial Services Bank, Benton, KentuckyUnsafe and unsound lending and customer information practices Search of Federal Reserve enforcement actions. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lael Brainard At the Inaugural Mike McCracken Lecture on Full Employment Sponsored by the Canadian Association for Business Economics (via webcast) I want to thank the Canadian Association for Business Economics for inviting me to join you today, particularly president Bonnie Lemcke and past president Armine Yalnizyan. It is a pleasure to be here with Carolyn Wilkins. I am honored to deliver the inaugural Mike McCracken Lecture on Full Employment.1Widely known for his critical contributions in bringing computer modeling to Canadian economic forecasting, Mike McCracken is perhaps best known for his tireless advocacy that "lower unemployment remains the most important goal for the economy," which is particularly resonant for me, along with his emphasis on thinking critically and expansively about full employment.2A similar theme was highlighted by community and labor representatives as well as educators at ourFed Listensevents, and it is now reflected in the Federal Reserve's new monetary policy framework.3 Lifting the lives of working people is at the heart of economic policymaking. The deep and disparate damage caused by the pandemic, coming just over a decade after the financial crisis, underscores the vital importance of full employment, particularly for low- and moderate-income workers and those facing systemic challenges in the labor market. Monetary Policy FrameworkTwo years ago, the Federal Reserve began an in-depth review of its monetary policy framework.4The design of our review process incorporated features from the Bank of Canada's quinquennial renewal of its inflation-control framework agreement, such as input from stakeholders and the focused research undertaken by staff members, academics, and outside experts. Our review was prompted by changes in key long-run features of the economy: The recognition that price inflation is much less sensitive to labor market tightness than historically—that is, a flat Phillips curve; that the equilibrium interest rate is much lower than in the past; and that trend underlying inflation has moved somewhat below 2 percent. These developments reduce the amount we can cut interest rates to buffer the economy, weaken inflation expectations, and could lead to worse employment and inflation outcomes over time if not addressed. In response, we have made changes to monetary policy that can be expected to support fuller and broader-based employment than in earlier recoveries, improving opportunities for workers who have faced structural challenges in the labor market.5Whereas our previous strategy had been to minimizedeviationsfrom maximum employment in either direction, monetary policy will now seek to eliminateshortfallsfrom maximum employment. In other words, the new framework calls for policy to address employment when it falls short of its maximum level, whereas the previous framework called for policy to react when employment was judged to be too high as well as too low. The new monetary policy framework also eliminates the previous reference to a numerical estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate and instead defines the maximum level of employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal for which a wide range of indicators are relevant. Additional changes address the persistence of below-target inflation and the decline in the equilibrium interest rate. Research and experience indicate that persistent low equilibrium interest rates increase the frequency and duration of periods when the policy rate is pinned close to zero, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target.6As a result, actual inflation and inflation expectations will tend to be biased below the 2 percent target, further eroding policy space and exacerbating the effects of the lower bound, risking a downward spiral for actual and expected inflation. From the time of the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) announcement of a 2 percent inflation objective in January 2012 through the most recent data in November, monthly readings of 12-month personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation have averaged 1.4 percent and have been below 2 percent in 95 out of the 107 months. To address the downward bias, the new framework adopts a flexible average inflation-targeting strategy (FAIT) that seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time in order to ensure longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored at 2 percent. Under a FAIT strategy, appropriate monetary policy aims to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time to make up for shortfalls during a period when it has been running persistently below 2 percent.7 These changes could have a beneficial effect on the robustness of employment as well as the economy's potential growth rate. In current circumstances, where a strong labor market can be sustained without the emergence of high inflation, the conventional practice of reducing policy accommodation preemptively when unemployment nears its estimated longer-run normal rate is likely to lead to an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many workers.8For instance, the labor market healing that took place after the unemployment rate reached the 5 percent median Summary of Economic Projections estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate, from the fourth quarter of 2015 until the fourth quarter of 2019, included the entry of a further 3-1/2 million prime-age Americans into the labor force, a movement of nearly 1 million people out of long-term unemployment, and opportunities for 2 million involuntary part-time workers to secure full-time jobs.9The gains in employment may have come sooner and been greater if the new monetary policy framework had been in place throughout the previous recovery. The new policy approach, by avoiding the need to tighten preemptively, could support labor market conditions that help to reduce persistent disparities. This could, in turn, boost activity and increase potential growth by drawing individuals from groups facing structural challenges into more productive employment.10Research and experience suggest the groups that face the greatest structural challenges in the labor market are likely to be the first to experience layoffs during downturns and the last to experience employment gains during recoveries.11At the October 2019Fed Listensevent, Amanda Cage, who now heads the National Fund for Workforce Solutions, observed, "What we see is huge disparities in what unemployment looks like for neighborhoods."12She highlighted the challenges facing those communities where unemployment remains at or above 15 percent even when unemployment falls below 4 percent at the national level. Recent research indicates that additional labor market tightening is especially beneficial to disadvantaged groups when it occurs in already tight labor markets, compared with earlier in the labor market cycle.13For example, the gap between the Black and White unemployment rates fell to an all-time low of 2 percentage points in August 2019—well below its average of 6.3 percentage points.14 Outlook and PolicyLate last year, the Committee integrated the framework changes into its monetary policy. The September 2020 FOMC statement adopted outcome-based forward guidance for the policy rate tied to shortfalls from maximum employment and 2 percent average inflation, and the December 2020 FOMC statement adopted outcome-based forward guidance for asset purchases. Our monetary policy approach should support a stronger, broader-based recovery from the deep and disparate damage of COVID-19. The guidance indicates that the Committee expects the policy rate to remain at the lower bound until employment has reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. The forward guidance reflects the important lesson that, with a significantly smaller scope to cut the policy rate than in past recessions, the Committee can provide needed accommodation by making forward commitments on the policy rate that are credible to the public.15The outcome-based forward guidance communicates how the policy rate will react to the evolution of inflation and employment. It makes clear that the timing of liftoff will depend on realized progress toward maximum employment and 2 percent average inflation. The FOMC statement notes that monetary policy will remain accommodative after liftoff in order to achieve "inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time."16Even after economic conditions warrant liftoff, changes in the policy rate are likely to be only gradual to support the inflation makeup strategy and maximum employment. Market expectations appear to have adjusted in response to the changes in the FOMC's approach. The Survey of Market Participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York indicates a shift in expectations following the release of the new monetary policy framework.17The median expected rate of unemployment at the time of liftoff moved down from 4.5 percent in the July survey, before the release of the framework, to 4.0 percent in the September and subsequent surveys, following the release of the new framework. Similarly, the median level of 12-month PCE inflation anticipated at the time of liftoff rose from 2 percent in the July survey to 2.3 percent in the September survey and beyond, following the introduction of FAIT.18 The forward guidance adopted in December expands the goals of the asset purchases beyond market functioning by establishing qualitative outcome-based criteria tied to realized progress on our employment and inflation goals. This approach integrates the forward guidance on the policy rate and on asset purchases, rather than establishing distinct criteria. The December guidance clarifies that the pandemic asset purchases will continue at least at the current pace until substantial further progress is made on our employment and inflation goals. In assessing substantial further progress, I will be looking for sustained improvements in realized and expected inflation and will examine a range of indicators to assess shortfalls from maximum employment. If we look ahead, effective vaccines and additional fiscal support are important positive developments, but the near-term outlook is challenging due to the resurgence of the pandemic, and the economy remains far from our goals. The most recent spending indicators point to a considerable loss of momentum late in the fourth quarter. Sales of consumer durable goods—such as furniture, electronics, and appliances—declined in November, after surging since the spring.19The rise in cases in November and the associated social distancing resulted in a decline in already low services consumption, with sales at restaurants and bars falling by 4 percent, the largest drop since April. Continued social distancing over the cold winter months is likely to generate a significant drag for spending on services that require personal contact. Additionally, state and local income and sales tax and gaming and energy-related revenues remain depressed, and the most recent payrolls report indicates that state and local governments are having difficulty sustaining employment levels as the virus persists. Inflation remains very low; core PCE inflation ran at 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in November. Even though some of the survey-based measures of inflation expectations have picked up recently, they still remain close to the lower end of their historical ranges. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have also picked up. While disentangling inflation expectations from liquidity and term premiums is imprecise, staff models attribute a significant portion of the movement in inflation compensation to an increase in expectations, bringing them up from the lows seen in March but still below their historical averages. Inflation may temporarily rise to or above 2 percent on a 12-month basis in a few months when the low March and April price readings from last year fall out of the 12-month calculation, but it will be important to see sustained improvement to meet our average inflation goal. The COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating disparities, and employment remains far from our goals. Last Friday's payroll report highlighted the effects of the resurgence of the virus, with the first overall decline in payrolls since April and a stark 498,000 decline in leisure and hospitality jobs. Overall, payroll employment is still nearly 10 million jobs below its February level. If we adjust the 6.7 percent headline unemployment rate for the decline in participation since February and the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimate of misclassification, the unemployment rate would be 10 percent, similar to the peak following the Global Financial Crisis. The damage from COVID-19 is concentrated among already challenged groups. Federal Reserve staff analysis indicates that unemployment is likely above 20 percent for workers in the bottom wage quartile, while it has fallen below 5 percent for the top wage quartile.20Black and Hispanic unemployment stood at 9.9 percent and 9.3 percent, respectively, in December, while White unemployment was 6.0 percent. Labor force participation for prime-age workers has declined, particularly for parents of school-aged children, where the declines have been greater for women than for men, and greater for Black and Hispanic mothers than for White mothers. The K-shaped recovery remains highly uneven, with certain sectors and groups experiencing substantial hardship. All told, real gross domestic product likely declined by about 2-1/2 percent in 2020, with the damage concentrated disproportionately among some groups of workers and sectors as well as smaller businesses. Fortunately, fiscal support looks set to resume playing a vital role in the form of stimulus payments and extended unemployment benefits, particularly for the cash-constrained households that make up a significant fraction of the population. The additional Paycheck Protection Program financing will be a vital support for the many hard-hit small businesses facing continued revenue shortfalls and declining cash balances. The damage would have been much greater in the absence of substantial fiscal and monetary support. The unprecedented scale and composition of fiscal support made a vital difference in replacing lost income and supporting demand in the middle of last year and is expected to do so again in the months ahead. The unprecedented speed and breadth of the monetary policy response through an expanded set of tools is supporting lower borrowing costs along the yield curve for households and businesses as well as better inflation and employment outcomes. The outlook will depend on the path of the virus and vaccinations. While the number of new cases is high and rising, the distribution of multiple effective vaccines is under way.21Spending on in-person services is likely to return to pre-pandemic levels only as conditions around the virus improve substantially. Most forecasts predict a significant rebound in aggregate spending this year. And there is some risk to the upside if the efficient delivery of vaccines across many jurisdictions ultimately results in a globally synchronized expansion. We are strongly committed to achieving our maximum-employment and average-inflation goals. It is too early to say how long it will take. The Committee has stated clearly that it needs to see substantial further progress toward our goals before adjusting purchases. The economy is far away from our goals in terms of both employment and inflation, and even under an optimistic outlook, it will take time to achieve substantial further progress. Given my baseline outlook, I expect that the current pace of purchases will remain appropriate for quite some time. Of course, the outlook is highly uncertain, and forecasts are subject to revisions—a key reason why our forward guidance is outcome based and tied to realized progress on our goals. The recovery thus far has been uneven, and the path ahead is uncertain. We remain far from our goals, with core PCE inflation only at 1.4 percent and payroll employment nearly 10 million below its pre-pandemic level. The Committee's forward guidance will help keep borrowing costs low along the yield curve for households and businesses, improve inflation outcomes, and enable the labor market to heal, leading to a broader-based and stronger recovery. The strong support from monetary policy, together with fiscal stimulus, should turn the K-shaped recovery into a broad-based and inclusive recovery that delivers full employment, as Mike McCracken would have wished. Thank you. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. In his 2012 Galbraith Lecture, Mike McCracken noted, "By 'full employment,' I mean that everyone who wants a job can find one that is acceptable in terms of compensation, safety, and other conditions of work." See Mike McCracken (2015), "The Search for Full Employment (PDF)" (Ottawa: Informetrica Limited, January), paper originally presented at the John Kenneth Galbraith Prize in Economics Lecture, delivered in the Progressive Economics Forum session at the Canadian Economics Association meetings, held in Calgary, June 2012.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, June).Return to text 4. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences," speech delivered at the "Economy and Monetary Policy" event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 16.Return to text 5. See Lael Brainard (2020), "Bringing the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy into Alignment with Longer-Run Changes in the Economy," speech delivered at "How the Fed Will Respond to the COVID-19 Recession in an Era of Low Rates and Low Inflation," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 1.Return to text 6. See Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-11 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, December); and Lael Brainard (2015), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.Return to text 7. See Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February); and Lael Brainard (2019), "Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications: Some Preliminary Views," speech delivered at the presentation of the 2019 William F. Butler Award, New York Association for Business Economics, New York, November 26.Return to text 8. Twelve-month PCE inflation was only 1.6 percent in December 2019, when the unemployment rate was 3.5 percent, racial gaps in employment were at historical lows, and labor force participation had increased.Return to text 9. These numbers are based on the observed changes in various aggregate labor market statistics between the fourth quarter of 2015 and the fourth quarter of 2019—the last quarter unaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic.Return to text 10. For a discussion of how structural disparities can lead to household underinvestment in areas such as education and business endeavors, see Lael Brainard (2017), "Labor Market Disparities and Economic Performance," remarks at "Banking and the Economy: A Forum for Minority Bankers," a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Mo., September 27.Return to text 11. Research finds that both unemployment rates and patterns of labor force entry and exit for Black and Hispanic workers are more cyclically sensitive than for White workers. See Tomaz Cajner, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017), "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text 12. See David Wessel, Amanda Cage, Victor Dickson, Russell Kavalhuna, and Robert Reiter (2019), "Monetary Policy Impact on Disadvantaged Workers' Long-Term Labor Market Prospects," panel discussion at "Monetary Policy's Impact on Workers and Their Communities," aFed Listensevent, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, October 17.Return to text 13. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 333–75.Return to text 14. These data are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey beginning in 1972. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019), "Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey."Return to text 15. See Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February). In addition, see analytical work developed as part of the framework review, such as Jonas Arias, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, Thorsten Drautzburg, and Andrea Raffo (2020), "Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); and James Hebden, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020), "How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).Return to text 16. See Board of Governors of the Federal System (2020), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16.Return to text 17. See Ryan Bush, Haitham Jendoubi, Matthew Raskin, and Giorgio Topa (2020), "How Did Market Perceptions of the FOMC's Reaction Function Change after the Fed's Framework Review?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), December 18.Return to text 18. The shift in the median appears to reflect an upward shift in the distribution: In the interquartile range of values between the 25th and 75th percentiles, inflation of 2.2 percent moved from the top of the range in July to the bottom of the range in September.Return to text 19. Through much of the recovery, spending on durable goods far exceeded the rates of growth that had been observed before the COVID-19 crisis. As a result, households may curtail their purchases going forward in order to bring the stock of consumer durables back in line with long-run levels of demand.Return to text 20. For more information on this analysis, see the box "Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Monetary Policy Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, June), pp. 8–9.Return to text 21. See the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID Data Tracker, available athttps://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#vaccinations.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from November 16 through December 16, 2020. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 15–16, 2020. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 15-16, 2020:HTML|PDF
Governor Lael Brainard At the AI Academic Symposium hosted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. (Virtual Event) Today's symposium on the use of artificial intelligence (AI) in financial services is part of the Federal Reserve's broader effort to understand AI's application to financial services, assess methods for managing risks arising from this technology, and determine where banking regulators can support responsible use of AI and equitable outcomes by improving supervisory clarity.1 The potential scope of AI applications is wide ranging. For instance, researchers are turning to AI to help analyze climate change, one of the central challenges of our time. With nonlinearities and tipping points, climate change is highly complex, and quantification for risk assessments requires the analysis of vast amounts of data, a task for which the AI field of machine learning is particularly well-suited.2The journalNaturerecently reported the development of an AI network which could "vastly accelerate efforts to understand the building blocks of cells and enable quicker and more advanced drug discovery" by accurately predicting a protein's 3-D shape from its amino acid sequence.3 Application of AI in Financial ServicesIn November 2018, I shared some early observations on the use of AI in financial services.4Since then, the technology has advanced rapidly, and its potential implications have come into sharper focus. Financial firms are using or starting to use AI for operational risk management as well as for customer-facing applications. Interest is growing in AI to prevent fraud and increase security. Every year, consumers bear significant losses from frauds such as identity theft and imposter scams. According to the Federal Trade Commission, in 2019 alone, "people reported losing more than $1.9 billion to fraud," which represents a mere fraction of all fraudulent activity banks encounter.5AI-based tools may play an important role in monitoring, detecting, and preventing such fraud, particularly as financial services become more digitized and shift to web-based platforms. Machine learning-based fraud detection tools have the potential to parse through troves of data—both structured and unstructured—to identify suspicious activity with greater accuracy and speed, and potentially enable firms to respond in real time. Machine learning models are being used to analyze traditional and alternative data in the areas of credit decisionmaking and credit risk analysis, in order to gain insights that may not be available from traditional credit assessment methods and to evaluate the creditworthiness of consumers who may lack traditional credit histories.6The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has found that approximately 26 million Americans are credit invisible, which means that they do not have a credit record, and another 19.4 million do not have sufficient recent credit data to generate a credit score. Black and Hispanic consumers are notably more likely to be credit invisible or to have an unscored record than White consumers.7The Federal Reserve's Federal Advisory Council, which includes a range of banking institutions from across the country, recently noted that nontraditional data and the application of AI have the potential "to improve the accuracy and fairness of credit decisions while also improving overall credit availability."8 To harness the promise of machine learning to expand access to credit, especially to underserved consumers and businesses that may lack traditional credit histories, it is important to be keenly alert to potential risks around bias and inequitable outcomes. For example, if AI models are built on historical data that reflect racial bias or are optimized to replicate past decisions that may reflect bias, the models may amplify rather than ameliorate racial gaps in access to credit. Along those same lines, the opaque and complex data interactions relied upon by AI could result in discrimination by race, or even lead to digital redlining, if not intentionally designed to address this risk. It is our collective responsibility to ensure that as we innovate, we build appropriate guardrails and protections to prevent such bias and ensure that AI is designed to promote equitable outcomes. As Rayid Ghani notes, "…[A]ny AI (or otherwise developed) system that is affecting people's lives has to be explicitly built to focus on increasing equity and not just optimizing for efficiency…[W]e need to make sure that we put guidelines in place to maximize the chances of the positive impact while protecting people who have been traditionally marginalized in society and may be affected negatively by the new AI systems."9 Black Box ProblemsRecognizing the potential and the pitfalls of AI, let us turn to one of the central challenges to using AI in financial services—the lack of model transparency. Some of the more complex machine learning models, such as certain neural networks, operate at a level of complexity that offers limited or no insight into how the model works. This is often referred to as the "black box problem," because we can observe the inputs the models take in, and examine the predictions or classifications the model makes based on those inputs, but the process for getting from inputs to outputs is obscured from view or very hard to understand. There are generally two reasons machine learning models tend toward opacity. The first is that an algorithm rather than a human being "builds" the model. Developers write the initial algorithm and feed it with the relevant data, but do not specify how to solve the problem at hand. The algorithm uses the input data to estimate a potentially complex model specification, which in turn make predictions or classifications. As Michael Tyka puts it, "[t]he problem is that the knowledge gets baked into the network, rather than into us. Have we really understood anything? Not really—the network has."10This is somewhat different from traditional econometric or other statistical models, which are designed and specified by humans. The second is that some machine learning models can take into account more complex nonlinear interactions than most traditional models in ways that human beings would likely not be able to identify on their own.11The ability to identify subtle and complex patterns is what makes machine learning such a powerful tool, but that complexity often makes the model inscrutable and unintuitive. Hod Lipson likens it to "meeting an intelligent species whose eyes have receptors [not] just for the primary colors red, green, and blue, but also for a fourth color. It would be very difficult for humans to understand how the alien sees the world, and for the alien to explain it to us."12 The Importance of ContextWhile the black box problem is formidable, it is not, in many cases, insurmountable. The AI research community has made notable strides in explaining complex machine learning models—indeed, some of our symposium panelists have made major contributions to that effort. One important conclusion of that work is that there need not be a single principle or one-size-fits-all approach for explaining machine learning models. Explanations serve a variety of purposes, and what makes a good explanation depends on the context. In particular, for an explanation to "solve" the black box problem, it must take into account who is asking the question and what the model is predicting. So what do banks need from machine learning explanations? The requisite level and type of explainability will depend, in part, on the role of the individual using the model. The bank employees that interact with machine learning models will naturally have varying roles and varying levels of technical knowledge. An explanation that requires the knowledge of a PhD in math or computer science may be suitable for model developers, but may be of little use to a compliance officer, who is responsible for overseeing risk management across a wide swath of bank operations. The level and type of explainability also depends on the model's use. In the consumer protection context, consumers' needs and fairness may define the parameters of the explanation. Importantly, consumer protection laws require lenders who decline to offer a consumer credit—or offer credit on materially worse terms than offered to others—to provide the consumer with an explanation of the reasons for the decision. That explanation serves the important purposes of helping the consumer to understand the basis of the determination as well as the steps the consumer could take to improve his or her credit profile.13 Additionally, to ensure that the model comports with fair lending laws that prohibit discrimination, as well as the prohibition against unfair or deceptive practices, firms need to understand the basis on which a machine learning model determines creditworthiness. Unfortunately, we have seen the potential for AI models to operate in unanticipated ways and reflect or amplify bias in society. There have been several reported instances of AI models perpetuating biases in areas ranging from lending and hiring to facial recognition and even healthcare. For example, a 2019 study by Science revealed that an AI risk-prediction model used by the U.S. healthcare system was fraught with racial bias. The model, designed to identify patients that would likely need high-risk care management in the future, used patients' historical medical spending to determine future levels of medical needs. However, the historical spending data did not serve as a fair proxy, because "less money is spent on Black patients who have the same level of need, and the algorithm thus falsely concludes that Black patients are healthier than equally sick White patients."14Thus, it is critical to be vigilant for the racial and other biases that may be embedded in data sources. It is also possible for the complex data interactions that are emblematic of AI—a key strength when properly managed—to create proxies for race or other protected characteristics, leading to biased algorithms that discriminate. For example, when consumers obtain information about credit products online, the complex algorithms that target ads based on vast amounts of data, such as where one went to school, consumer likes, and online browsing habits, may be combined in ways that indicate race, gender, and other protected characteristics.15Even after one online platform implemented new safeguards pursuant to a settlement to address the potential exclusion of consumers from seeing ads for credit products based on race, gender, or other protected characteristics, Professor Alan Mislove and his collaborators have found that the complex algorithms may still result in bias and exclusion.16Therefore, it is important to understand how complex data interactions may skew the outcomes of algorithms in ways that undermine fairness and transparency. Makada Henry-Nickie, notes that "…[I]t is of paramount importance that policymakers, regulators, financial institutions, and technologists critically examine the benefits, risks, and limitations of AI and proactively design safeguards against algorithmic harm, in keeping with societal standards, expectations, and legal protections."17I am pleased that the symposium includes talks from scholars who are studying how we can design AI models that avoid bias and promote financial inclusion. No doubt everyone here today who is exploring AI wants to promote financial inclusion and more equitable outcomes and ensure that it complies with fair lending and other laws designed to protect consumers. In the safety and soundness context, bank management needs to be able to rely on models' predictions and classifications to manage risk. They need to have confidence that a model used for crucial tasks such as anticipating liquidity needs or trading opportunities is robust and will not suddenly become erratic. For example, they need to be sure that the model would not make grossly inaccurate predictions when it confronts inputs from the real world either that differ in some subtle way from the training data or that are based on a highly complex interaction of the data features. In short, they need to be able to have confidence that their models are robust. Explanations can be an important tool in providing that confidence. Not all contexts require the same level of understanding of how machine learning models work. Users may, for example, have a much greater tolerance for opacity in a model that is used as a "challenger" to existing models and simply prompts additional questions for a bank employee to consider relative to a model that automatically triggers bank decisions. For instance, in liquidity or credit risk management, where AI may be used to test the outcomes of a traditional model, banks may appropriately opt to use less transparent machine learning systems. Forms of ExplanationsResearchers have developed various approaches to explaining machine learning models. Often, these approaches vary in terms of the type of information they can provide about a model. As banks contemplate using these tools, they should consider what they need to understand about their models relative to the context, in order to determine whether there is sufficient transparency in how the model works to properly manage the risk at issue. Not all machine learning models are a black box. In fact, some machine learning models are fully "interpretable" and therefore may lend themselves to a broader array of use cases. By "interpretable" I mean that developers can "look under the hood" to see how those models make their predictions or classifications, similar to traditional models. They can examine how much weight the model gives to each data feature, and how it plays into a given result. Interpretable machine learning models are intrinsically explainable. In the case of machine learning models that are opaque, and not directly interpretable, researchers have developed techniques to probe these models' decisions based on how they behave. These techniques are often referred to as model agnostic methods, because they can be used on anymodel, regardless of the level of explainability. Model agnostic methods do not access the inner workings of the AI model being explained. Instead, they derive their explanationspost hocbased on the model's behavior: essentially, they vary inputs to the AI model, and analyze how the changes affect the AI model's outputs.18In effect, a model agnostic method uses this testing as data to create a model of the AI model.19 While post hoc explanations generated by model agnostic methods can allow inferences to be drawn in certain circumstances, they may not always be accurate or reliable, unlike intrinsic explanations offered by interpretable models. Basing an explanation on a model's behavior rather than its underlying logic in this way may raise questions about the explanation's accuracy, as compared to the explanations of interpretable models. Still, such explanations may be suitable in certain contexts. Thus, one of the key questions banks will face is when a post hoc explanation of "black box" model is acceptable versus when an interpretable model is necessary. To be sure, having an accurate explanation for how a machine learning model works does not by itself guarantee that the model is reliable or fosters financial inclusion. Time and experience are also significant factors in determining whether models are fit to be used. The boom-bust cycle that has defined finance for centuries should make us cautious in relying fully for highly consequential decisions on any models that have not been tested over time or on source data with limited history, even if in the age of big data, these data sets are broad in scope. Expectations for BanksRecognizing that AI presents promise and pitfalls, as a banking regulator, the Federal Reserve is committed to supporting banks' efforts to develop and use AI responsibly to promote a safe, fair, and transparent financial services marketplace. As regulators, we are also exploring and understanding the use of AI and machine learning for supervisory purposes, and therefore, we too need to understand the different forms of explainability tools that are available and their implications. To ensure that society benefits from the application of AI to financial services, we must understand the potential benefits and risks, and make clear our expectations for how the risks can be managed effectively by banks. Regulators must provide appropriate expectations and adjust those expectations as the use of AI in financial services and our understanding of its potential and risks evolve.20 To that end, we are exploring whether additional supervisory clarity is needed to facilitate responsible adoption of AI. It is important that we hear from a wide range of stakeholders—including financial services firms, technology companies, consumer advocates, civil rights groups, merchants and other businesses, and the public. The Federal Reserve has been working with the other banking agencies on a possible interagency request for information on the risk management of AI applications in financial services. Today's symposium serves to introduce a period of seeking input and hearing feedback from a range of external stakeholders on this topic. It is appropriate to be starting with the academic community that has played a central role in developing and scrutinizing AI technologies. I look forward to hearing our distinguished speakers' insights on how banks and regulators should think about the opportunities and challenges posed by AI. 1. I am grateful to Kavita Jain, Jeff Ernst, Carol Evans, and Molly Mahar of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. David Rolnick, et al., "Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning (PDF)," ; Sarah Castellanos, "Climate Researchers Enlist Big Cloud Providers for Big Data Challenges,"The Wall Street Journal, November 25, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/climate-researchers-enlist-big-cloud-providers-for-big-data-challenges-11606300202.Return to text 3. Ewen Callaway, "'It will change everything': DeepMind's AI makes gigantic leap in solving protein structures,"Nature588 (November 30, 2020): 203–204, https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03348-4.Return to text 4. Lael Brainard, "What Are We Learning about Artificial Intelligence in Financial Services?"(remarks at Fintech and the New Financial Landscape, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, November 13, 2018).Return to text 5. Federal Trade Commission,Consumer Sentinel Network, Data Book 2019 (PDF), (Washington: Federal Trade Commission, January 2019).Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System et al., "Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting (PDF)."Return to text 7. Kenneth P. Brevoort, Philipp Grimm, and Michelle Kambara,Data Point: Credit Invisibles (PDF)(Washington: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, May 2015).Return to text 8. Federal Advisory Council (FAC)Record of Meeting, (December 3, 2020) (PDF).Return to text 9. Rayid Ghani, "Equitable Algorithms: Examining Ways to Reduce AI Bias in Financial Services (PDF)" (testimony before the House Committee on Financial Services Task Force on Artificial Intelligence Hearing on February 12, 2020).Return to text 10. Davide Castelvevchi, "Can we open the black box of AI?"Nature538(October 5, 2016): 20–23, https://www.nature.com/news/can-we-open-the-black-box-of-ai-1.20731.Return to text 11. Cynthia Rudin, "Please Stop Explaining Black Box Models for High-Stakes Decisions (PDF)" (paper presented at 32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Montreal, Canada, November 2018).Return to text 12. Castelvevchi, "Can we open," 20–23.Return to text 13. Among other things, the explanation can also make consumers aware of any erroneous information that drove the denial of credit.Return to text 14. Ziad Obermeyer et al., "Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations,"Science366 (October 25, 2019): 447–453, https://science.sciencemag.org/content/366/6464/447.Return to text 15. Carol A. Evans and Westra Miller, "From Catalogs to Clicks: The Fair Lending Implications of Targeted, Internet Marketing," Consumer Compliance Outlook, third issue, 2019.Return to text 16. Piotr Szapiezynski et al., "Algorithms That 'Don't See Color': Comparing Biases in Lookalike and Special Ad Audiences," (2019), https://sapiezynski.com/papers/sapiezynski2019algorithms.pdf; Till Speicher, et al., "Potential for Discrimination in Online Targeted Advertising (PDF)," Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 81:1–15, 2018 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency.Return to text 17. Makada Henry-Nickie, "Equitable Algorithms: Examining Ways to Reduce AI Bias in Financial Services (PDF)" (testimony before the House Committee on Financial Services Task Force on Artificial Intelligence Hearing on February 12, 2020).Return to text 18. See Marco Tulio Ribeiro et al., "Model-Agnostic Interpretability of Machine Learning" (presented at 2016ICML Workshop on Human Interpretability in Machine Learning, New York, New York, 2016); Zachary C. Lipton, "The Mythos of Interpretability" (presented at 2016 ICML Workshop on Human Interpretability in Machine Learning, New York, New York, 2016).Return to text 19. See Cynthia Rudin, "Please Stop Explaining" and Christoph Molnar,Interpretable Machine Learning: A Guide for Making Black Box Models Explainable(Christoph Molnar).Return to text 20. The Federal Reserve's Model Risk Management guidance (SR 11-7) establishes an expectation that models used in banking are conceptually sound or "fit for purpose." SR 11-7 instructs that when evaluating a model, supervised institutions should consider the "[t]he design, theory, and logic underlying the model." The Model Risk Management guidance discusses in detail the tools banks rely on to help establish the soundness of their models, such as back-testing and benchmarking and other outcomes-based tests.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the "The Road Ahead for Central Banks," a seminar sponsored by the Hoover Economic Policy Working Group, Hoover Institution, Stanford, California (via webcast) On August 27, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) unanimously approved a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which represents a robust evolution of its monetary policy framework.1At its September and December FOMC meetings, the Committee made material changes to its forward guidance to bring it into line with the new policy framework.2Before I discuss the new framework in detail and the policy implications that flow from it, please allow me to provide some background on the reasons the Committee felt that our framework needed to evolve. Motivation for the ReviewAs my FOMC colleagues and I indicated from the outset, the fact that the Federal Reserve System chose to conduct this review does not indicate that we believed we were poorly served by the framework in place since 2012.3Indeed, I would argue that over the past eight years, the framework served us well and supported the Federal Reserve's efforts after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) first to achieve and then, for several years, to sustain—until cut short this spring by the COVID-19 pandemic—the operation of the economy at or close to both our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability in what became the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Nonetheless, both the U.S. economy—and, equally importantly, our understanding of the economy—have clearly evolved along several crucial dimensions since 2012, and we believed that in 2019 it made sense to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we might refine and rethink our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and sustain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible in the global economy in which we operate today and for the foreseeable future. Perhaps the most significant change since 2012 in our understanding of the economy is our reassessment of the neutral real interest rate, r*, that, over the longer run, is consistent with our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. In January 2012, the median FOMC participant projected a long-run r* of 2.25 percent, which, in tandem with the inflation goal of 2 percent, indicated a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 4.25 percent. However, in the eight years since 2012, members of the Committee—as well as outside forecasters and financial market participants—have repeatedly marked down their estimates of longer-run r* and, thus, the neutral nominal policy rate. Indeed, as of the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) released in December, the median FOMC participant currently projects a longer-run r* equal to just 0.5 percent, consistent with a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 2.5 percent.4Moreover, as is well appreciated, the decline in neutral policy rates since the GFC is a global phenomenon that is widely expected by forecasters and financial markets to persist for years to come. The substantial decline in the neutral policy rate since 2012 has critical implications for the design, implementation, and communication of Federal Reserve monetary policy because it leaves the FOMC with less conventional policy space to cut rates to offset adverse shocks to aggregate demand. With a diminished reservoir of conventional policy space, it is much more likely than was appreciated in 2012 that, in economic downturns, the effective lower bound (ELB) will constrain the ability of the FOMC to rely solely on the federal funds rate instrument to offset adverse shocks. This development, in turn, makes it more likely that recessions will impart elevated risks of more persistent downward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on unemployment that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy should, in design and implementation, seek to offset throughout the business cycle and not just in downturns themselves. Two other, related developments that have also become more evident than they appeared in 2012 are that price inflation seems less responsive to resource slack, and also, that estimates of resource slack based on historically estimated price Phillips curve relationships are less reliable and subject to more material revision than was once commonly believed. For example, in the face of declining unemployment rates that did not result in excessive cost-push pressure to price inflation, the median of the Committee's projections of u*—the rate of unemployment consistent in the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objective—has been repeatedly revised lower, from 5.5 percent in January 2012 to 4.1 percent as of the December 2020 SEP. Projections of u* by the Congressional Budget Office and professional forecasters show a similar decline during this same period and for the same reason. In the past several years of the previous expansion, declines in the unemployment rate occurred in tandem with a notable and, to me, welcome increase in real wages that was accompanied by an increase in labor's share of national income, but not a surge in price inflation to a pace inconsistent with our price-stability mandate and well-anchored inflation expectations. Indeed, this pattern of mid-cycle declines in unemployment coincident with noninflationary increases in real wages has been evident in the U.S. data since the 1990s. With regard to inflation expectations, there is broad agreement among academics and policymakers that achieving price stability on a sustainable basis requires that inflation expectations be well anchored at the rate of inflation consistent with the price-stability goal. This is especially true in the world that prevails today, with flat Phillips curves in which the primary determinant of actual inflation is expected inflation. The pre-GFC academic literature derived the important result that a credible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy that is not constrained by the ELB can deliver, under rational expectations, inflation expectations that themselves are well anchored at the inflation target. In other words, absent a binding ELB constraint, a policy that targets actual inflation in these models delivers long-run inflation expectations well anchored at the target "for free." But this "copacetic coincidence" no longer holds in a world of low r* in which adverse aggregate demand shocks are expected to drive the economy in at least some downturns to the ELB. In this case, which is obviously relevant today, economic analysis indicates that flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy cannot be relied on to deliver inflation expectations that are anchored at the target, but instead will tend to deliver inflation expectations that, in each business cycle, become anchored at a level below the target. This is the crucial insight in my colleague John Williams's research with Thomas Mertens. This downward bias in inflation expectations under inflation targeting in an ELB world can in turn reduce already scarce policy space—because nominal interest rates reflect both real rates and expected inflation—and it can open up the risk of the downward spiral in both actual and expected inflation that has been observed in some other major economies. The New Framework and Price StabilitySix features of the new framework and fall 2020 FOMC statements define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability and maximum-employment mandates over time. First, the Committee expects to delay liftoff from the ELB until PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation has risen to 2 percent and other complementary conditions, consistent with achieving this goal on a sustained basis, have also been met.5 Second, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time in the service of keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.6 Third, the Committee expects that appropriate monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time after the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.7 Fourth, policy will aim over time to return inflation to its longer-run goal, which remains 2 percent, but not below, once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.8 Fifth, inflation that averages 2 percent over time represents an ex ante aspiration of the FOMC, but not a time-inconsistent ex post commitment.9 As I highlighted in a speech at the Brookings Institution in November, I believe that a useful way to summarize the framework defined by these five features istemporary price-level targeting (TPLT, at the ELB) that reverts to flexible inflation targeting (once the conditions for liftoff have been reached).10Just such a framework has been analyzed by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Bernanke (2020), who in turn build on earlier work by Evans (2012), Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). Each of these five elements of the new framework is consequential. I now discuss each in turn and provide some context for how I understand them to relate to the monetary economics literature on TPLT. A policy that delays liftoff from the ELB until a threshold for average inflation has been reached is one element of a TPLT strategy. Starting with our September FOMC statement, we communicated that inflation reaching 2 percent is a necessary condition for liftoff from the ELB. This condition refers to inflation on an annual basis. TPLT with such a one-year memory has been studied by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019). The FOMC also indicated in these statements that the Committee expects to delay liftoff until inflation is "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time." What "moderately" and "for some time" mean will depend on the initial conditions at liftoff (just as they do under other versions of TPLT), and the Committee's judgment on the projected duration and magnitude of the deviation from the 2 percent inflation goal will be communicated in the quarterly SEP for inflation. In the TPLT studies I cited earlier, policy is assumed to revert to an inertial Taylor rule after liftoff, and therefore policy remains accommodative for some time thereafter, which depends on the degree of policy inertia in the reaction function. Our three most recent FOMC statements also call for policy to remain accommodative for some time after liftoff, and, once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met, the SEP "dot plot" will convey the Committee's projections for the pace of liftoff as well as the ultimate destination for the policy rate. Our new framework is asymmetric. That is, as in the previously cited TPLT studies, the goal of monetary policy after lifting off from the ELB is to return inflation to its 2 percent longer-run goal, but not to push inflation below 2 percent. In the case of the Federal Reserve, we have highlighted that making sure that inflation expectations remain anchored at our 2 percent objective is just such a consideration. Speaking for myself, I follow closely the Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations (CIE) as a relevant indicator that this goal is being met (see the figure).11Other things being equal, my desired pace of policy normalization post-liftoff to return inflation to 2 percent—as well as the projected pace of return to 2 percent inflation—would be somewhat slower than otherwise if the CIE index is, at time of liftoff, below the pre-ELB level. Another factor I will consider in calibrating the pace of policy normalization post-liftoff is the average rate of PCE inflation since the new framework was adopted in August 2020—a time, as it happened, when the federal funds rate was constrained at the ELB. Our framework aims ex ante for inflation to average 2 percent over time, but it does not make a (time-inconsistent) commitment to achieve ex post inflation outcomes that average 2 percent under any and all circumstances. The same is true for the TPLT studies I cited earlier. In these studies, the only way in which average inflation enters the policy rule is through the timing of liftoff itself. Yet in stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model under TPLT with a one-year memory that reverts to flexible inflation targeting after liftoff, inflation does average very close to 2 percent(see the table). The model of Mertens and Williams (2019) delivers a similar outcome: Even though the policy reaction function in their model does not incorporate an ex post makeup element, it delivers a long-run (unconditional) average rate of inflation equal to target by aiming for a moderate inflation overshoot away from the ELB that is calibrated to offset the inflation shortfall caused by the ELB. The New Framework and Maximum EmploymentRegarding our maximum-employment mandate—a sixth element—an important evolution in our new framework is that the Committee now defines maximum employment as the highest level of employment that does not generate sustained pressures that put the price-stability mandate at risk.12As a practical matter, this definition means to me that when the unemployment rate is elevated relative to my SEP forecast of its long-run natural level, monetary policy should, as before, continue to be calibrated to eliminate such employment shortfalls so long as doing so does not put the price-stability mandate at risk. Indeed, in our September and subsequent FOMC statements, we indicated that we expect it will be appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in the current 0 to 25 basis point target range until inflation has reached 2 percent (on an annual basis)andlabor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment. In our new framework, when in a business cycle expansion labor market indicators return to a range that, in the Committee's judgment, is broadly consistent with its maximum-employment mandate, it will be data on inflation itself that policy will react to, but going forward, policy will not tighten solely because the unemployment rate has fallen below any particular econometric estimate of its long-run natural level. This guidance has an important implication for the Taylor-type policy reaction function I will consult. Consistent with our new framework, the relevant policy rule benchmark I will consult once the conditions for liftoff have been met is an inertial Taylor-type rule with a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, a coefficient of 1.5 on the gap between core PCE inflation and the 2 percent longer-run goal, and a neutral real policy rate equal to my SEP forecast of long-run r*. Such a reference rule, which becomes relevant once the conditions for policy normalization have been met, is similar to the forward-looking Taylor-type rule for optimal monetary policy derived in Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999). Concluding RemarksIn closing, I think of our new flexible average inflation-targeting framework as a combination of TPLT at the ELB with flexible inflation targeting, to which TPLT reverts once the conditions to commence policy normalization articulated in our most recent FOMC statement have been met. In this sense, our new framework indeed represents anevolution, not a revolution.Thank you very much, and I now look forward—as always—to the discussion with the participants in this virtual Hoover event. ReferencesAhn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2. Bernanke, Ben S. (2020). "The New Tools of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 110 (April), pp. 943–83. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"AEA Papers and Proceedings,vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26. Clarida, Richard H. (2020a). "The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31. ——— (2020b). "The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16. Clarida, Richard H., Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139–233. Evans, Charles L. (2012). "Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent Price-Level Target,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February, S1), pp. 147–55. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019). Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. 1. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 2. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 3. For studies and references on the elements that motivated the launch of the review, see Clarida (2020a).Return to text 4. The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the December 2020 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 5. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective: "The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate" (paragraph 4). The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 indicate the conditions for liftoff: "The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4). The statements are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 6. The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 read: "With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent" (paragraph 4). A similar sentence appears in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.Return to text 7. The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 read: "The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved" (paragraph 4).Return to text 8. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective (see note 5).Return to text 9. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy says: "In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4).Return to text 10. See Clarida (2020b).Return to text 11. See Ahn and Fulton (2020) for a discussion of the CIE index.Return to text 12. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates this concept with the following: "The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments" (paragraph 3).Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York (via webcast) It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the Council on Foreign Relations.1I regret that we are not doing this session in person, as we did last year, and I hope the next time I am back, we will be gathering together in New York City again. I look forward to my conversation with Steve Liesman and to your questions, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIn the second quarter of last year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Economic activity rebounded robustly in the third quarter and has continued to recover in the fourth quarter from its depressed second-quarter level, though the pace of improvement has moderated. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre-pandemic level, supported in part by federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits. In contrast, spending on services remains well below pre-pandemic levels, particularly in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. In the labor market, more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. Inflation, following large declines in the spring of 2020, picked up over the summer but has leveled out more recently; for those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, price increases remain subdued. While gross domestic product growth in the fourth quarter downshifted from the once-in-a-century 33 percent annualized rate of growth reported in the third quarter, it is clear that since the spring of 2020, the economy has turned out to be more resilient in adapting to the virus, and more responsive to monetary and fiscal policy support, than many predicted. Indeed, it is worth highlighting that in the baseline projections of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) summarized in the latest Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), most of my colleagues and I revised up our outlook for the economy over the medium term, projecting a relatively rapid return to levels of employment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).2In particular, the median FOMC participant projects that by the end of 2023—a little less than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen below 4 percent, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels. While the recent surge in new COVID cases and hospitalizations is cause for concern and a source of downside risk to the very near-term outlook, the welcome news on the development of several effective vaccines indicates to me that the prospects for the economy in 2021 and beyond have brightened and the downside risk to the outlook has diminished. The two new SEP charts that we released for the first time following the December FOMC meeting speak to these issues by providing information on how the risks and uncertainties that surround the modal or baseline projections have evolved over time. While nearly all participants continued to judge that the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook remains elevated, fewer participants saw the balance of risks as weighted to the downside than in September. Although a little more than half of participants judged risks to be broadly balanced for economic activity, a similar number continued to see risks weighted to the downside for inflation. The Latest FOMC Decision and the New Monetary Policy FrameworkAt our most recent FOMC meetings, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. As announced in the September statement and reiterated in November and December, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.3We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent,anduntil inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, in the December statement, we combined our forward guidance for the federal fund rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month untilsubstantial further progresshas been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The changes to the policy statement that we made over the fall bring our policy guidance in line with the new framework outlined in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee approved last August.4In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "shortfalls[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations." This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."5While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—which remain unchanged.6 Concluding RemarksWhile our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so as the recovery progresses, it will take some time for economic activity and employment to return to levels that prevailed at the business cycle peak reached last February. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The most recent SEP is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. See the FOMC statements issued after the September, November, and December meetings, which are available (along with other postmeeting statements) on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 4. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 5. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.Return to text 6. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.Return to text