Governor Lael Brainard At the 2021 Federal Reserve Stress Testing Research Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts (via webcast) I want to thank all of you for joining our research conference and the organizing committee for inviting me to share some thoughts on climate scenario analysis.1 Economic analysis suggests that climate change could have profound consequences for the level, trend growth, and variability of economic activity over time and across regions and sectors. Some of these effects could occur gradually, while others could occur relatively quickly in the presence of "tipping points." Policy, technology, and behavioral responses could similarly have material financial consequences. Against this backdrop, the Federal Reserve is carefully considering the potential implications of climate-related risks for financial institutions and the financial system, with scenario analysis emerging as a potential key analytical tool for that purpose. Climate change is projected to have profound effects on the economy and the financial system, and it is already inflicting damage. The Sixth Assessment Report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) notes that "if global warming increases, some compound extreme events with low likelihood in [the] past and current climate will become more frequent, and there will be a higher likelihood that events with increased intensities, durations and/or spatial extents unprecedented in the observational record will occur."2 We can already see the growing costs associated with the increasing frequency and severity of climate-related events. The total cost of U.S. weather and climate disasters over the last 5 full years exceeds $630 billion, which is a record.3During this period, massive flooding in the Midwest has caused billions of dollars in damages to farms, homes, and businesses.4The California Department of Insurance has documented growing problems with the availability of fire insurance for homeowners, and the state legislature provided new protections for wildfire survivors.5Last year was the sixth consecutive year that the United States experienced ten or more billion-dollar weather and climate disasters.6And this summer, Hurricane Ida alone is estimated to have caused more than $30 billion in insurance losses.7 The pandemic is a stark reminder that extreme events can materialize with little warning and trigger severe financial losses and market disruptions, and the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report is a reminder of the high uncertainty and potential costs associated with climate-related risks. It will be important to systematically assess the resilience of large financial institutions and the broader financial system to climate-related risk scenarios. Climate Scenario AnalysisAs we are learning from the pandemic, risks emanating from outside the economy can have devastating financial consequences. As part of our prudential and financial stability responsibilities, we are developing scenario analysis to model the possible financial risks associated with climate change and assess the resilience of individual financial institutions and the financial system to these risks. The future financial and economic consequences of climate change will depend on the severity of the physical effects and the nature and speed of the transition to a sustainable economy. So it is important to model the transition risks arising from changes in policies, technology, and consumer and investor behavior and the physical risks of damages caused by an increase in the frequency and severity of climate-related events as well as chronic changes, such as rising temperatures and sea levels. From the IPCC's work, we know that the physical risks related to climate change will grow over time, while the transition risks will depend in part on how abruptly policy, technology, and behavioral changes take place. Since financial markets are forward looking, a change in expectations regarding climate-related risks could lead to a sharp repricing of assets at any time. Acute hazards, such as damaging hurricanes, or climate-related policy changes could quickly alter perceptions of future risk or reveal new information about the value of assets. Sudden asset price changes can lead to financial instability when they interact with other vulnerabilities, such as high leverage or correlated exposures.8 Scenario analysis is a useful tool in assessing the links between climate-related risks and economic outcomes because it requires assessing the implications for financial stability and individual financial institutions in a systematic way. The interactions across institutions and market segments must be traced out, and missing data must be identified, acquired, and analyzed, leading to a clearer picture of the transmission of risks. Scenario analysis should ultimately facilitate estimating the possible effects on individual financial institutions as well as on financial markets more broadly. By systematically modeling the effects of climate-related risks across the financial system, scenario analysis can help inform risk management at the level of individual financial institutions and more broadly. Given that this conference is about stress testing, it is worth revisiting some lessons from the first generation of bank stress tests.9Bank stress tests were developed at the height of the 2007–09 financial crisis to provide a more systematic way to assess the effects of complex and interrelated exposures within the financial system. The first test, known as the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), used simplified models with limited data inputs. Despite substantial uncertainty about the economy's path, the SCAP was broadly viewed as successful. It provided a solid foundation for building out the stress-testing program over the subsequent decade. The stress test infrastructure and granular models and data that are currently available bear little resemblance to that first stress test. In parallel, banks have improved their risk-management operations, and large banks now routinely use their own stress tests to assess and manage their risks. So what are the lessons for scenario analysis? Starting down the path of climate scenario analysis, even with a rudimentary first attempt, will help with risk identification and suggest useful lessons to inform subsequent improvements in modeling, data, and financial disclosures. Although we should be humble about what the first generation of climate scenario analysis is likely to deliver, the challenges we face should not deter us from building the foundations now. Learning from Climate Scenario Analysis in Other CountriesThere is a growing international consensus that climate scenario analysis is a vital tool for assessing the effects of climate-related risks on financial institutions and the financial system. Since 2017, a group of regulators from across the world has been sharing best practices regarding climate-related risk management within the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). The Federal Reserve joined this international collaboration late last year. Several countries have already made substantial progress on climate scenario analysis. The scenarios produced by the NGFS, with appropriate tailoring to local conditions, have been incorporated in climate change analysis by the European Central Bank (ECB) as well as by financial regulators in Canada, France, and the United Kingdom. For instance, the ECB published results from its analysis of climate-related risks in September 2021, and the Bank of England published scenarios in June 2021 with results expected in the middle of 2022.10The Federal Reserve is actively learning from these early adopters. Overcoming Challenges in Implementing Climate Scenario AnalysisThere are challenges to quantifying the effects of climate-related risks on the economy and the financial system. Climate scenario analysis faces the challenge of having to consider plausible but novel combinations of risks that are associated with substantial uncertainty. For traditional financial risk scenarios, modelers can draw on the historical record to help gauge the plausible repercussions for different asset classes as well as the economic consequences at the national level. Even in the case of the COVID-19 pandemic, modelers could draw useful lessons from previous pandemics, such as the 1918 influenza.11By contrast, there may not be analogous historical precedents to draw on in the formulation of appropriate climate scenarios and the quantification of their effects on different asset classes, regions, and sectors. In addition, climate scenario analysis may need to consider interdependencies across the financial system. Banks and other financial institutions often rely on insurance and other hedging strategies to reduce potential losses. With climate risk raising insurance premiums charged to property owners or reducing the availability of insurance in certain geographies and on certain asset classes, it may be important to assess the resilience of insurance and other hedging strategies and the associated implications for supervised institutions. Stress could be transmitted through a sudden repricing of insurance contracts or by a withdrawal of coverage, as we are already seeing in the case of wildfires and flooding in certain areas. While reinsurance contracts and agreements among investors can transfer risk across the financial system, some level of risk is likely to remain. Climate-related risks could build up in hidden ways that could result in cascading losses. Using Established Economic Foundations for Transition RisksThe costs and timing of the transition to a low-carbon economy will depend on hard-to-predict policy, technology, and behavioral changes.12While an orderly and steady transition to a sustainable economy may have manageable economic consequences, more costly changes would likely accompany an abrupt transition. A disorderly scenario could generate sizable economic consequences that vary substantially across geographies, sectors, and assets. Some of these effects could manifest in the near term if investment sentiment were to change suddenly. That said, the long tradition within economics of estimating the effects of policy changes can be applied to the modeling of transition risks, even disorderly scenarios.13 Mapping the Economic Consequences of Physical RisksWhereas existing economic tools can be applied to transition risks, the building blocks for assessing the economic consequences of physical risks in the presence of substantial uncertainty are still in development. The literature on the economic consequences of physical risk is growing, but there are still some challenges in linking this literature to the formulation of scenarios.14For instance, extrapolating from the historical experience of sporadic extreme weather events may turn out to be misleading. Economic activity has tended to rebound quickly after sporadic extreme weather events in recent experience, often supported by significant reconstruction. In contrast, climate change is an ongoing, cumulative process that could significantly increase the prevalence and severity of extreme events as well as contribute to chronic changes. These cumulative and chronic changes could have economic effects that differ substantively from the historic experience, for example, if they contribute to shifts in the location of economic activity or the sectoral composition within a region. The physical manifestations of climate change could increase the volatility of economic activity and slow economic growth.15The cumulative effects associated with climate change could lead to irreversible "tipping points" that introduce new climate shocks and change the relationships between climate-related shocks and economic variables. Tipping points, such as melting ice sheets and loss of permafrost or forests, have the potential to create large disruptions in weather systems, regional water supplies, and the habitability of large land masses. The potential cumulative effects of climate-related shocks as well as potential climate-related tipping points for the economy and financial system could reduce the accuracy of forecasts based on historical experience.16 Regional and Sectoral Differentiation in Projections of Revenues and LossesThe consequences of climate change are likely to be highly differentiated by region and economic sector, which can bring both risks and opportunities for financial institutions. Regional and sectoral differentiation has important implications for scenario analysis.17Climate-related risks can be expected to have direct effects not only on the valuation of assets on the balance sheets of financial institutions, but also on revenues and costs. While standard models for projecting the net revenues of financial institutions are typically driven by national-level proxies of aggregate demand, such as growth and unemployment levels, additional sectoral and regional granularity will be necessary for climate scenario analysis. And while standard models for projecting losses on assets account for regional and sectoral characteristics, climate scenario analysis will require capturing the potential intensification of climate-related risks. Closing Data GapsThese efforts to systematically assess climate-related risks will require substantial work to address current data gaps. Financial institutions are collecting data and developing scenario analysis to understand the potential effect of climate-related risks. Similarly, the Federal Reserve is gathering key data resources, such as acquiring external data and making existing publicly available climate data more useful for modeling and research capabilities. Current voluntary climate-related disclosures are an important first step in closing data gaps, but they are prone to inconsistent quality and incompleteness. Without harmonization of the definitions and methods underlying these disclosures, it will be challenging to make comparisons across firms and exposures. Consistent, comparable, and, ultimately, mandatory disclosures are likely to be vital to enable market participants to measure, monitor, and manage climate risks on a consistent basis across firms.18The Securities and Exchange Commission has responsibility for this critical workstream in the United States.19 Making ProgressGoing forward, it will be important to improve our understanding of climate-related financial risks and vulnerabilities. The Federal Reserve's Supervision Climate Committee is engaging with domestic stakeholders and other supervisors from a prudential perspective. Ultimately, I anticipate it will be helpful to provide supervisory guidance for large banking institutions in their efforts to appropriately measure, monitor, and manage material climate-related risks, following the lead of a number of other countries. In addition, the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Climate Committee is assessing climate-related risks to financial stability from a macroprudential perspective—that is, one that considers the potential for complex interactions across the financial system. Both the prudential and macroprudential work programs will benefit from the development of climate scenario analysis. ConclusionTogether these efforts can help ensure that the financial system is resilient to climate-related risks and well positioned for the transition to a sustainable economy. Our conversations with climate experts, large banking institutions, other financial intermediaries, stakeholders, and regulators underscore the complexity of the connections between the climate and economic and financial systems. To better understand these connections, several foreign regulators have already undertaken climate scenario analysis, affording us the opportunity to learn from their experiences. It will be helpful to move ahead with the first generation of climate scenario analysis to identify risks and potential issues and to inform subsequent refinements to our models and data. We will reach better outcomes if we tackle these challenges through open dialogue and continued engagement of the kind exemplified by today's conference. 1. I am grateful to Luca Guerrieri and Cindy Vojtech as well as Kevin Stiroh of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2021; in press), "Summary for Policymakers," in V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou, eds.,Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change(Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press), p. SPM-35, paragraph C.3.3. The report also notes that "global surface temperature will continue to increase until at least the mid-century under all emissions scenarios considered" (p. SPM-17, headline statement B.1).Return to text 3. Damage estimate uses events listed in years 2016 through 2020 in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters database, available on the agency's website athttps://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/events.Return to text 4. See Donnelle Eller (2021), "Climate Change-Driven 'Midwest Water Hose' Caused Massive 2019 Flooding in Iowa, Elsewhere, UIResearchers Find,"Des Moines Register,March 2,https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/money/agriculture/2021/03/02/ui-study-climate-change-midwest-water-hose-dumping-rain-university-iowa/6884486002.Return to text 5. See California Department of Insurance (2018), "Insurance Commissioner Dave Jones Releases Report Addressing Fire Insurance Availability Issues," press release, January 4; and California Department of Insurance (2021), "Wildfire Survivors Now Covered by New Insurance Protections," press release, July 27.Return to text 6. See the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters database, in note 3.Return to text 7. See Leslie Scism (2021), "Ida Storm Damage Expected to Cost Insurers at Least $31 Billion,"Wall Street Journal,September 22.Return to text 8. See the box "The Implications of Climate Change for Financial Stability" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November), pp. 58–59.Return to text 9. Several of the conference papers apply lessons from stress testing to the analysis of climate-related risks. See Paulo Issler, Richard Stanton, Carles Vergara-Alert, and Nancy Wallace (2021), "Mortgage Markets with Climate-Change Risk: Evidence from Wildfires in California"; Hyeyoon Jung, Robert Engle, and Richard Berner (2021), "Climate Stress Testing"; and Henk Jan Reinders, Dirk Schoenmaker, and Mathijs van Dijk (2021), "A Finance Approach to Climate Stress Testing." These three papers can be downloaded from the conference website, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (https://www.bostonfed.org/news-and-events/events/federal-reserve-stress-testing-research-conference/2021.aspx).Return to text 10. For the European Central Bank, see ECB (2021), "Firms and Banks to Benefit from Early Adoption of Green Policies, ECB's Economy-wide Climate Stress Test Shows," press release, September22; and Luis de Guindos (2021), "Shining a Light on Climate Risks: The ECB's Economy-wide Climate Stress Test,"ECB Blog,March 18. For the Bank of England, see Bank of England (2021),Key Elements of the 2021 Biennial Exploratory Scenario: Financial Risks from Climate Change(London: BOE, June).Return to text 11. See Sergio Correia, Stephan Luck, and Emil Verner (2020), "Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health Interventions Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu," working paper, June.Return to text 12. See International Energy Agency (2021),Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector(Paris: IEA, May).Return to text 13. See Robert Vermeulen, Edo Schets, Melanie Lohuis, Barbara Kölbl, David-Jan Jansen, and Willem Heeringa (2018), "An Energy Transition Risk Stress Test for the Financial System of the Netherlands," Occasional Studies, vol. 16-7 (Amsterdam: De Nederlandsche Bank, October), available athttps://www.dnb.nl/en/publications/research-publications/occasional-studies/nr-7-2018-an-energy-transition-risk-stress-test-for-the-financial-system-of-the-netherlands.Return to text 14. For instance, see Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken (2012), "Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 4 (July), pp. 66–95; Solomon Hsiang, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan, D.J. Rasmussen, Robert Muir-Wood, Paul Wilson, Michael Oppenheimer, Kate Larsen, and Trevor Houser (2017), "Estimating Economic Damage from Climate Change in the United States,"Science,vol. 356 (June), pp. 1362–69; and Maximilian Auffhammer (2018), "Quantifying Economic Damages from Climate Change,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 32 (Fall), pp. 33–52.Return to text 15. See Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (2020),NGFS Climate Scenarios for Central Banks and Supervisors(PDF)(Paris: NGFS, June).Return to text 16. See, for instance, Simon Dietz, James Rising, Thomas Stoerk, and Gernot Wagner (2021), "Economic Impacts of Tipping Points in the Climate System,"PNAS,vol. 118 (August).Return to text 17. See, for instance, ECB (2021), "Firms and Banks to Benefit from Early Adoption of Green Policies, ECB's Economy-wide Climate Stress Test Shows," press release, September22.Return to text 18. See, for instance, Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (2021),Progress Report on Bridging Data Gaps(PDF)(Paris: NGFS, May); and thecommuniqué (PDF)on the Third G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting, held July 9–10, 2021.Return to text 19. See Gary Gensler (2021), "Prepared Remarks before the Principles for Responsible Investment 'Climate and Global Financial Markets' Webinar," Washington, July 28.Return to text
Following a comprehensive review, the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a broad set of new rules that will prohibit the purchase of individual securities, restrict active trading, and increase the timeliness of reporting and public disclosure by Federal Reserve policymakers and senior staff. As a result of the new policies, senior Federal Reserve officials will be limited to purchasing diversified investment vehicles, like mutual funds. The new restrictions will apply to both Reserve Bank and Board policymakers and senior staff and prohibit them from purchasing individual stocks, holding investments in individual bonds, holding investments in agency securities (directly or indirectly), or entering into derivatives. The new rules are expansive and are designed to place the Federal Reserve's investment and trading rules at the forefront among major federal agencies. "These tough new rules raise the bar high in order to assure the public we serve that all of our senior officials maintain a single-minded focus on the public mission of the Federal Reserve," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell. To help guard against even the appearance of any conflict of interest in the timing of investment decisions, policymakers and senior staff generally will be required to provide 45 days' advance notice for purchases and sales of securities, obtain prior approval for purchases and sales of securities, and hold investments for at least one year. Further, no purchases or sales will be allowed during periods of heightened financial market stress. Reserve Bank presidents now will be required to publicly disclose financial transactions within 30 days, as Board Members and senior staff currently do. The Board and the Reserve Banks will incorporate these new restrictions into the appropriate Federal Reserve rules and policies over the coming months.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday that it has joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion, which will foster ongoing dialogue, research, and education to raise awareness of economic and financial issues and opportunities around Indigenous economies. The Board's participation will be supported by theCenter for Indian Country Developmentat the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and theEconomic Education Partnership with Indian Countryat the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The network is a collaboration with Te Pūtea Matua (the Reserve Bank of New Zealand), the Bank of Canada, and the Reserve Bank of Australia. "The Federal Reserve Board is pleased to join the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion and I am personally looking forward to deepening our discussions with colleagues from around the world on economic issues that matter to Indigenous communities," Governor Michelle W. Bowman said. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Thursday that it will begin its Survey of Finance Companies this month as part of the Board's continuing effort to improve its understanding of credit availability to households and businesses in the United States. "These data improve our understanding of credit availability in our economy and the particular role played by finance companies," said Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell in a letter to prospective survey participants. The survey collects data on major categories of household, real estate, and business loans, various liabilities, and income and expense information from finance companies. In addition, the 2021 survey includes questions on COVID-19 pandemic relief accommodations provided by finance companies. These data provide a benchmark for the Federal Reserve's monthly report on the outstanding balances of finance companies (presented in the Federal Reserve'sFinance Companiesstatistical release) and provide a comprehensive update on these companies' sources of funds. This information in turn becomes an important input to the estimates of total consumer credit (presented in the Federal Reserve'sConsumer Creditstatistical release) and the Financial Accounts of the United States. The attached letter from Chair Powell was sent to approximately 2,000 companies urging their participation in the survey. Individual responses will be kept confidential. More information about the survey is available atwww.federalreserve.gov/financecosurvey. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Letter from Chair Powell (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday that it will host a series of diversity and inclusion conferences in November focused on the experiences that underrepresented groups have as they participate in the economy, the economics profession, central banking, and finance. Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell will provide opening remarks at each event. The first conference, to be held on November 8, will explore how gender influences economic and financial outcomes over an individual's lifetime. Special emphasis will be placed on evidence-based strategies that promote a more inclusive economy, particularly as the nation moves into a post-pandemic recovery. The second conference, to be held on November 9, will be hosted in partnership with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the European Central Bank. It will focus on research about diversity and inclusion in economics, finance, and central banking and includes a panel discussion among current and former central bank officials. The conferences will be webcast atwww.federalreserve.govandwww.youtube.com/federalreserve. Complete conference agendas are available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/conferences.htm. For media inquiries, email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Gender and the Economy ConferenceNovember 8, 2021 Conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance, and Central BankingNovember 9, 2021
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: UBS AG, Zurich, Switzerland and UBS AG Stamford Branch, Stamford, ConnecticutCease and Desist Order, dated May 20, 2015 (PDF)Terminated September 23, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that the Federal Reserve Banks will adopt the ISO®20022 message format for the Fedwire®Funds Service. The change will allow for enhanced efficiency of both domestic and cross-border payments, and a richer set of payment data that may help banks and other entities comply with sanctions and anti-money laundering requirements. The Board also invited public comment on a revised plan for migrating the Fedwire Funds Service to the new message format. Specifically, the Board is proposing that the Reserve Banks adopt the new message format on a single day, rather than in three separate phases as previously proposed. The Fedwire Funds Service is a real-time gross settlement system owned and operated by the Federal Reserve Banks. It enables businesses and financial institutions to transfer funds quickly and securely. The ISO 20022 format was developed by the International Organization for Standardization, which is an independent, non-governmental organization that publishes standards for a broad range of industries. Comments are due 90 days after publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: New Message Format for the Fedwire® Funds Service
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday invited public comment on a technical notice of review regarding primary dealers operating in Spain. Specifically, a bank owned by a Spanish parent company intends to acquire a domestic primary dealer. A primary dealer is a securities broker‑dealer or other entity that has been approved to be a trading counterparty with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. As a result, the Federal Reserve is required by law to make a specific determination about the respective competitive opportunities in the Spanish and American public debt markets. Comments must be received within 30 days of the notice's publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Notice of Review and Request for Comment
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition order against Ileana Acevedo DiazFormer employee of Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, San Juan, Puerto RicoUnauthorized transactions in a customer's accounts Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Pioneer Bank, Mapleton, MinnesotaFlood insurance violations; civil money penaltyConsent Order, dated October 5, 2021 Prohibition and restitution against Mai Ly-VuFormer employee of Pacific Premier Bank, Irvine, CaliforniaImproper involvement and personal financial interests in extensions of credit by the bank Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Note: On October 8, 2021, the final decision document regarding the enforcement action against Mai Ly-Vu was added. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF) Attachment 3 (PDF)
Governor Lael Brainard At Fed Listens: Roundtable with Oklahoma Tribal Leaders, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma I would like to join Esther George in expressing my appreciation to the leaders of tribal nations assembled here for this opportunity to listen and learn from this afternoon's conversation. I also want to thank Governor Anoatubby for hosting us.1I am humbled to be here at the First Americans Museum, which is promoting a richer understanding of Native American history by sharing the cultural diversity, history, and resilience of the 39 Native nations of Oklahoma. In addition to civic and cultural contributions whose impact reaches far beyond tribal lands, I want to recognize the important economic contributions Native American communities are making, despite daunting impediments that were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. By working together to address economic challenges and improving access to financial services, we can build a more inclusive economy that supports the economic potential of Native communities here in Oklahoma and across the country. The COVID-19 Pandemic in Indian Country: Challenge and ResilienceTribal nations have long been a critical source of economic opportunity and stability. For the U.S. economy overall, tribes provided over 1.1 million jobs prior to the pandemic.2Here in Oklahoma, when looking at how the economic activity of tribes compares with different industries in the state, tribes would rank 9th in output, at over $7 billion, and 11th in job creation—greater than either the construction or utilities industries. By one estimate, tribal government activities supported nearly 100,000 jobs in the state and brought nearly $5 billion in wages and benefits to Oklahoma workers as of 2017.3Oklahoma tribes also contributed nearly $43 million for the construction and maintenance of Oklahoma roads, bridges, and other transportation infrastructure that are used by all Oklahomans.4 The resilience of Native communities was evident in the strong response of tribal nations to the pandemic. As early as April 2020, just a month after the pandemic swept across the U.S., tribal nations were proactively offering COVID-19 testing for the general public. Once vaccines began to roll out in early 2021, tribal nations distributed them under a prioritized and phased timeline developed in accordance with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance. This assistance from tribal nations helped make Oklahoma one of the top 10 states for vaccine rollout.5 But the pandemic added to sharp economic disparities that are longstanding. Prior to the pandemic, the median household income for American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) households was about $20,000 lower than for non-Hispanic White households.6Native American women faced particularly large disparities with 18 percent living in poverty before the pandemic—about 12 percentage points higher than White women.7About 59 percent of AI/AN women overall are considered financially fragile.8Such disparities were only exacerbated by the pandemic.9The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis's Center for Indian Country Development, a research institute dedicated to tribal economic development, estimates that the employment-to-population ratio for AI/AN households is 2.5 percentage points lower than the national average in August 2021, down from June 2020, when the gap was over 4 percentage points.10 The pandemic also led to significant declines in the revenues of tribal governments and businesses at a time when their services were more important than ever. In recent surveys by the Center for Indian Country Development, many respondents reported large, persistent revenue losses, with only one in five tribal entities indicating they have stable revenues.11At the same time, they reported facing substantial increases in their operational costs that they expected to remain elevated for at least six months. Identifying Barriers to Financial InclusionTo address these disparities, it will be important to understand and make progress on key impediments to financial access. Native communities face impediments to accessing a range of financial services, including banking, mortgage financing, small business credit, and financial education. Perhaps most fundamentally, access to banking services is important to ensure the financial wellbeing of individuals and the vitality of the communities in which they live. Over 16 percent of AI/AN households were unbanked in 2019—three times higher than the national average.12The low levels of banking relationships are partly due to a lack of proximate bank branches: Majority-Native American counties, on average, have only three bank branches, which is below the nine-branch average in nonmetro counties, and well below the 26-branch overall average for all counties.13Just the basic act of opening a bank account is challenging when the nearest bank branch is, on average, 12 miles away from the geographic center of a reservation and may be more than 60 miles away—in comparison to less than 1 mile on average for most counties.14 Native households also face barriers to homeownership, which is a vital tool to build wealth. According to the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances, the median homeowner has 40 times the household wealth of a renter.15While 75 percent of Native households reported a strong desire to own their home, Native American communities face significant impediments. First, they face a lack of adequate supply.16Overcrowding and physical housing problems are far more severe than in other parts of the country.17A 2017 Department of Housing and Urban Development assessment concluded that to alleviate substandard and overcrowded homes in Indian Country, 68,000 units need to be built.18Second, tribally designated housing authorities reported that the credit readiness of individual tribal borrowers was a key challenge in obtaining credit, followed by the lack of homebuyer education.19In addition, tribal members have trouble obtaining home loans, especially for properties located on trust land due to the complexity in using trust property as collateral. Overcoming these challenges to expand homeownership options on trust and restricted land could strengthen reservation economies and the well-being of tribal members.20Building new homes and preserving older ones employs a wide range of workers and provides opportunities to build valuable skills. These activities have a ripple effect as related jobs are spread over other sectors of the community, including manufacturing, retail, and business services.21 Native small businesses also face special challenges in obtaining credit. Small businesses can be the lifeblood of a community, providing jobs, goods and services, and stability as well as the opportunity for owners to build wealth.22About 300,000 Native American-owned small businesses and enterprises exist in the U.S. today, generating around $50 billion of revenue a year.23Native American business owners have made their mark in various industries, including tourism, gaming, energy, agriculture, forestry, manufacturing, and federal contracting. Yet, Native small businesses struggle to access bank credit, a critical part of encouraging small business growth and formation. Data from the Survey of Business Owners and Self- Employed Persons show far fewer AI/AN-owned businesses were started by using bank financing compared with all business owners.24These differences are supported by anecdotal perspective that Native Americans have more difficulty financing their new businesses with loans from traditional lenders than non-Natives do.25In addition, Native business owners consistently reported using credit cards to finance business startups at a greater rate than other startups.26The CDFI Fund'sAccessing Capital and Credit in Native Communities Reportconcludes a possible explanation is that Native business owners have more difficulty accessing lower-cost standard bank loans than do other entrepreneurs. Native small businesses faced much greater challenges as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and generally received less robust support.27Small businesses in tribal areas were both less likely to receive Paycheck Protection Program assistance and received less, on average, than businesses in non-tribal areas.28 Financial literacy and personal financial management skills are critically important, especially for households with low liquid savings and wealth. While there are limited data about financial behaviors in Indian Country, available information suggests that Native Americans face higher levels of financial fragility than many other groups. Given these challenges, Native American youth may stand to benefit from opportunities to develop personal finance skills and financial management experience.29 Addressing Barriers to InclusionAs Native communities tackle these impediments to financial inclusion, collaborative efforts across a range of public-sector, private-sector, and nonprofit organizations can be helpful. As part of our mission to build a strong, inclusive economy, the Federal Reserve has a role to play in supporting economic growth and financial inclusion in Native communities. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Reform The CRA is one powerful tool in building a more inclusive economy for individuals and communities. As one of several landmark civil rights laws to address systemic inequities in credit access, the CRA confers an affirmative obligation on banks to help meet the credit needs of the local communities in which they do business, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The CRA prompts banks to be not only more active lenders in LMI areas, but it also encourages activities with minority depository institutions (MDIs) that are especially important to serving the credit and investment needs of minority communities. We are working with the other banking agencies to propose CRA reforms that should improve financial inclusion and the availability of community development financing in underserved communities.30As we work together to propose reforms to strengthen the law's core purpose, we have a unique opportunity to design a regulation that better addresses the credit needs for Native communities and in Indian Country—including increasing banking services, access to credit for households and businesses, and funding for community development.31 Two years ago, I had the pleasure of visiting with the Thunder Valley Community Development Corporation on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. We toured a major housing, small business, and community development mixed-use project, which was under construction. Despite the importance of the Thunder Valley project to the community, banks were not among the funders listed for this important project. This illustrates the broader challenge faced by underserved communities where there are few bank branches. I want to highlight two of the proposals that the Federal Reserve Board (the Board) sought feedback on in the September 2020 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to strengthen CRA regulations. Recognizing that many places in Indian Country have few bank branches and are located outside of branch-based assessment areas, the Board proposed that a bank in any part of the country could receive credit for eligible CRA activities in Indian Country, even when there is not a branch nearby. Banks need to be confident about receiving CRA credit to seek out activities and investments in these areas. The Board has also sought feedback on ways to encourage and reward banks for activities that are responsive to community needs, particularly in harder-to-serve areas. One approach is the use of impact scores for community development activities to ensure that performance evaluations adequately reflect the relative importance of loans and investments within communities. As we work toward a set of interagency proposals on how to strengthen CRA regulations, we will continue to focus on and seek feedback on how to best encourage impactful CRA activities in Indian Country, including for building climate resilience where needed.32 Supporting Native Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) and MDIs In addition to traditional banks and credit unions, a robust CDFI ecosystem can also be a lifeline to support credit access in underserved communities. Between 2001 and 2021, the number of Native CDFIs increased fivefold from just 14 to 71 in the U.S.33While Native CDFI loans tend to be small—the average loan size was just $16,000 in 2017—they fill a critical gap, especially for those who have thin credit profiles or have poor credit profiles.34Moreover, CDFIs can help improve clients' credit and boost their financial access. Native CDFIs in Oklahoma have been highly successful in providing financial access to Native Americans, supporting mortgage lending, small business growth, and economic activity more broadly. Despite the challenges presented by the pandemic, Native CDFIs across the country avoided the increases in delinquencies and charge offs that were anticipated early on, and only a few have had to restructure their organization's corporate debt as a result of COVID-19 so far, highlighting the quality of Native CDFI investments.35 The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (FRB Kansas City) Community Development department supports Native CDFIs and Native MDIs in a number of ways with a focus on convening, facilitation, and resource development.36For example, staff support state-wide CDFI working groups in Oklahoma and New Mexico, which both have significant representation of Native CDFIs. Further, through its flagship program, Investment Connection, FRB Kansas City links banks with CRA-eligible activities. Since its creation in 2011, Investment Connection has enabled $50 million in loans and grants to be connected with community organizations.37These funds have supported work in affordable housing, small business development, and workforce development, among other areas. Several organizations working in Indian Country have been able to make successful, CRA-eligible connections through FRB Kansas City's Investment Connection, including an Oklahoma based Native American CDFI. The Federal Reserve System will continue to be a resource to provide information and best practices for CDFIs as more tribes seek information about establishing their own financial institution. Economic Education The Economic Education team at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis with support from the Atlanta and Kansas City Reserve Banks has been committed to providing tribal nations and Native communities in Oklahoma and across the country with personal finance and economic education programming. Understanding the diversity of Native languages and cultures, the programming offers the flexibility to adapt to local needs. This work, led by Megan Cruz, a citizen of the Osage Nation, who is here today, brings financial education to tribal programs spanning all ages—including early childhood learning, youth programs, housing, reservation schools, higher education, workforce development, children and family services, and elder programs.38 Center for Indian Country Development A pervasive lack of data makes it difficult to evaluate how economic developments are impacting Indian Country. The limitations of the data available on Indian Country are due to data collection and reporting issues, such as small sample size or large margins of error.39At the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Center for Indian Country Development collects data and conducts economic research and analysis to help resolve the critical need for accurate and timely data. One of the steps they have taken includes publishing a labor market data tool, which presents estimates of the labor force participation rate, employment-to-population ratio, and unemployment rate for the AI/AN population in the U.S.40 The Center for Indian Country Development also focuses on applied research and engagement in Indian Country to support long term economic prosperity and inclusion. Recent research has centered on the role tribal enterprises play in economic opportunity and how tax revenues in Indian Country can help improve the economic infrastructure and financial inclusion for tribal communities. Through policy webinars and its upcoming inaugural research summit, the Center is working alongside tribal leaders to leverage data and research to improve the economic well-being of Indian Country. The Reserve Banks play a unique and important role in increasing our understanding of local needs and regional issues, and in the Federal Reserve Districts with large Native American populations and stakeholders, our Banks are very engaged with Indian Country activities. We welcome the diverse perspectives of Native Americans, from serving on our boards and advisory councils to joining us as full-time employees, to better inform our decisionmaking. Tawney Brunsch, the CEO of Lakota Funds, a Native CDFI, is the current Vice Chair of the Board's Community Advisory Council, which offers diverse perspectives on the financial services needs of communities, with a focus on lower- to moderate-income neighborhoods.41 Earlier today, the Federal Reserve announced we had joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion (Network) alongside the Reserve Bank of New Zealand/Te Pūtea Matua, the Bank of Canada, and the Reserve Bank of Australia. The mission of the Network is to foster ongoing dialogue and raise awareness of Indigenous economic and financial issues, share knowledge and best practices, and promote engagement and education on Indigenous economy and history, in partnership with Indigenous Peoples. It is a welcome opportunity for us to better understand how each central bank is working to improve financial inclusion for and with Indigenous Peoples. We look forward to learning from our Indigenous partners and central bank members in the Network. ConclusionIn closing, I want to affirm that it is important to us at the Federal Reserve to deepen our understanding of tribal nations and strengthen our relationships with Native communities. We welcome opportunities such as today's conversation to learn from you as tribal leaders about the economic issues that are most pressing for your citizens and communities. Today's discussion is part of an ongoing conversation we hope to continue that will help us better reflect the economic experiences of Native Americans. 1. I am grateful to Megan Cruz of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Katherine Arnold, Charlene van Dijk, and David Kaufmann of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See James Robert Colombe and Rory Taylor,"Tribal enterprises drive economic activity in Indian Country and beyond,"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, July 6, 2021.Return to text 3. See Kyle D. Dean,Economic Impact of Tribal Nations in OklahomaFiscal Year 2017(Oklahoma City: Oklahoma City University, 2019), https://www.unitedforoklahoma.com/media/1456/2019-economic-impact-of-tribal-nations-in-oklahoma.pdf. The report defines economic output as business revenues, government expenditures, and expenditures for capital improvements including roads projects.Return to text 4. See Dean,Economic Impact of Tribal Nations.Return to text 5. See "Safely Navigating a Global Pandemic," United for Oklahoma, https://www.unitedforoklahoma.com/community-impact/pandemic-response/.Return to text 6. See"Profile: American Indian/Alaska Native,"U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health, last modified October 8, 2021.Return to text 7. See Amanda Fins,"National Snapshot: Poverty among Women & Families, 2020," (PDF)fact sheet (Washington: National Women's Law Center, December 2020).Return to text 8. See Sarah Dewees and Gary Mottola,"Race and Financial Capability in America: Understanding the Native American Experience," (PDF)Insights: Financial Capability(April 2017): 1–17.Return to text 9. See Donna Feir, Chris James, Casey Lozar, and Ryan Nunn,"Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds in COVID-19 Recovery,"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, September 8, 2020; Casey Lozar, Donna Feir, and James Robert Colombe,"COVID-19: A Deep Economic Crisis in Indian Country,"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 13, 2020; and Casey Lozar, Donna Feir, and James Robert Colombe,"COVID-19 and Indian Country: Early Snapshot Reveals Disproportionate Economic Exposure and Uncertainty,"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April 10, 2020.Return to text 10. See Center for Indian Country Development,"Native American Labor Market Dashboard,"webpage, Sept. 22.Return to text 11. See Matthew Greg and Casey Lozar (2021),"One Year into Covid-19, pandemic's negative effects persist in Indian Country,"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 19, 2021.Return to text 12. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,How America Banks: Household Use of Banking andFinancial Services:2019 FDIC Survey(PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, October 2020).Return to text 13. Information calculated using Summary of Deposits (SoD) 2020. Note that not all counties, especially some with high Native American populations, exist in the SoD dataset.Return to text 14. See Miriam Jorgensen and Randall K.Q. Akee,Access to Capital and Credit in Native Communities: A Data Review(Tucson: Native Nations Institute, February 2017), https://www.novoco.com/sites/default/files/atoms/files/nni_find_access_to_capital_and_credit_in_native_communities_020117.pdf and"Branch Closings Typically Create Modest Increase in Distance to Banks,"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, last modified April 19, 2021.Return to text 15. See Neil Bhutta, Jesse Bricker, Andrew C. Chang, Lisa J. Dettling, Sarena Goodman, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, Sarah Reber, Alice Henriques Volz, and Richard A. Windle,"Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2016 to 2019: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," (PDF)Federal Reserve Bulletin106 (September 2020): 1–42.Return to text 16. See"Alaska Rural Homeownership Resource Guide," (PDF)Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January 2017, and"Native Communities,"Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.Return to text 17. See Patrice H. Kunesh,"Tribal Leaders Handbook on Homeownership,"Center for Indian Country Development, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 2018. The differences in incomes, ages, and race/ethnicity of homeowners also play a part in the magnitude of these identified issues.Return to text 18. See Jennifer Biess, Christopher Hayes, G. Thomas Kingsley, Diane Levy, Nancy Pindus, and Jasmine Simington,Housing Needs of American Indians and Alaska Natives in Tribal Areas: A Report From the Assessment of American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian Housing Needs(PDF)(Washington: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, January 2017).Return to text 19. See Nikki Pieratos and Tony Walters, "Findings from the 2018 National Tribal Housing and Homeownership Survey," Center for Indian Country Development, http://naihc.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/NAIHCSurveyLetter.pdf.Return to text 20. In the case of trust lands, the United States holds the legal title to property, and the individual Indian(s) or tribe holds the beneficial interest. For restricted lands, the individual Indian(s) or tribe holds the legal title. Both trust and restricted lands cannot be alienated without approval of the United States. See Angelique Wambdi EagleWoman and Stacy L. Leeds,Mastering American Indian Law: Second Edition(Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2019).Return to text 21. See Kunesh, "Tribal Leaders Handbook on Homeownership."Return to text 22. See U.S. Small Business Administration,"Small Businesses Generate 44 Percent of U.S. Economic Activity,"news release, January 30, 2019.Return to text 23. See"How SBA Helps Native American Small Business Owners Succeed,"U.S. Small Business Administration, November 10, 2020.Return to text 24. See Jorgensen and Akee,Access to Capital and Credit.Return to text 25. See Jorgensen and Akee,Access to Capital and Credit.Return to text 26. According to the CDFI Fund'sAccessing Capital and Credit in Native Communities Report, AI/AN business owners report using credit cards to finance startups at a rate 3-5 percent higher than the average.Return to text 27. Following the onset of the pandemic, conditions for Native small businesses worsened. The Center for Indian Country Development and National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development surveyed small businesses in Indian Country in 2020 and found that about 68 percent of businesses saw at least a 20 percent revenue reduction, while 1 in 6 businesses reported having lost all revenue (as of mid-July 2020) because of COVID-19. See Feir, James, Lozar, and Nunn, "Indian Country Small Businesses."Return to text 28. See Tyler Boesch, Casey Lozar, and Ryann Nunn,"Paycheck Protection Program leaves some businesses in tribal areas behind,"November 19, 2020, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.Return to text 29. See Dewees and Mottola, "Race and Financial Capability in America."Return to text 30. See Lael Brainard,"Strengthening the CRA to Meet the Challenges of Our Time"(speech at the Urban Institute, Washington, D.C., September 21, 2020); see also"Federal Reserve Board statement on the Community Reinvestment Act,"press release, July 20, 2021.Return to text 31. See Lael Brainard,"Modernizing and Strengthening CRA Regulations: A Conversation with the National Congress of American Indians"(speech at the National Congress of American Indians 77th Annual Convention & Marketplace, November 10, 2020).Return to text 32. See"Pathfinders: Climate-Smart Solutions from Rural America and Native Nations,"The Aspen Institute.Return to text 33. See Jorgensen and Akee,Access to Capital and Creditand"List of Certified Community Development Financial Institution (CDFIs) with Contact Information as of September 14, 2021,"Community Development Financial Development Institutions Fund.Return to text 34. See"Native CDFI Industry Profile 2017," (PDF)Oweesta.Return to text 35. See Native CDFI Network,Native CDFIS: Stepping up to Serve Indian Country through the Pandemic and Beyond(PDF)(Washington: Native CDFI Network, September 2021).Return to text 36. Oklahoma is within the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's district.Return to text 37. See Ariel Cisneros,"10 years of Investment Connection continue with virtual events this fall,"Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 10, 2021.Return to text 38. See"An Economic Education Partnership with Indian Country,"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, November 19, 2020.Return to text 39. See "Data Disaggregation:The Asterisk Nation,"National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) Policy Research Center.Return to text 40. See Center for Indian Country Development,"Native American Labor Market Dashboard,"Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.Return to text 41. See"Advisory Councils,"Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last modified June 11, 2021.Return to text
Governor Randal K. Quarles At the Third Conference on Financial Stability, Madrid, Spain Thank you, Pablo, for the kind welcome. It is an honor to be here at this important conference on financial stability. And it is great to be here in Madrid and see all of you in person. I commend the organizers for their attention to detail in bringing us together as we all emerge from the events of the last 18 months. I'm here with you today as the Chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and today the FSB stands at an inflection point. From here, we can look back at the events and actions of the last 18 months to see what we have learned. And—in light of that—we can then look forward, to see how the FSB will address ongoing and future financial stability challenges. All of the researchers attending this conference are no doubt doing something similar—looking back to learn so that we can better prepare for the future. Living through the events of last year was an experience of near chaos. The world had stopped functioning the way it should, leading to unexpected—and in some cases almost unimaginable—outcomes, including in our financial markets. As we got some distance from the turmoil and studied pieces of the problems, patterns started to emerge. We began to appreciate nuances that we hadn't appreciated in the moment. This conference is being held just a few blocks from where Picasso'sGuernicahangs, and in preparing these remarks I reflected on the first time I saw the painting, almost half a century ago—at that time at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, before Picasso would let the painting come to its home in Spain. One's first look atGuernicais chaotic, dizzying, viscerally frightening, hard to comprehend. But after looking about it, thinking about it, living with one's memory of the images for some time (in my case, I still think I'm understanding new things about it after 50 years), we start to see the story told by the bits and pieces. The economic and financial shock created by the outbreak of COVID-19 and the global imposition of attendant containment measures—what I typically refer to as the "COVID event"—was precisely the kind of global crisis that the FSB was created for, and—as was envisaged—the FSB has played a central role. But our work is not finished. As we emerge from the acute phase of the COVID event, the FSB's focus is shifting from crisis management to addressing forward-looking issues. At an event last October, I spoke about some of the lessons of the COVID event for the U.S. financial system. Today, speaking as FSB Chair, I'd like to reflect on the role the FSB played. How did we respond in the crisis? What lessons can we draw? And where can we sharpen our focus for the road ahead? Reacting and Responding to Crisis: Leveraging Cooperation to Ensure Stability and Contain SpilloversThe period between the Global Financial Crisis and the onset of the COVID event provided some calm for an organization that was built to address crisis. But the FSB was not idle. During that decade, FSB members focused on enhancing the global financial system's resilience to shocks. Together, we strengthened our respective frameworks for analyzing vulnerabilities and monitoring risks. We developed measured policy responses to address those vulnerabilities and risks and assessed reforms made in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis. FSB members have been working alongside one another for since 2009 to improve tools for resilience. Just as important, members have built trust among themselves, been transparent with their actions, and coordinated with each other. This has all been vital in preparing us to work together in the unprecedented and unpredictable landscape of the last 18 months. Early in the crisis, as the COVID event unfolded, the FSB provided a forum where members met regularly—some part of the FSB was meeting almost constantly in the early weeks—to exchange information about the trajectory of the COVID event, policy responses across member jurisdictions, and areas where the potential for spillovers needed to be addressed. Navigating a crisis is no small feat. As we, collectively, moved through the experience, we did not have much opportunity to share details on how we worked together to forge a coherent path. In outlining the many steps we took together, I hope to provide an anatomy of coordination through crisis. Given the openness of information sharing, FSB members were able to quickly identify areas of concern that required action. We used real-time input to focus on four critical nodes of the global financial system: financing of the real economy; access to U.S. dollar funding; meeting financial intermediaries' liquidity demands; and monitoring counterparty risks. This open communication and real-time monitoring improved policymakers' clarity around executing emergency measures to help stabilize domestic economies. Additionally, this information sharing helped FSB members ensure coordinated steps and minimize opportunities for harmful spillovers. Throughout the COVID event but especially in the spring of 2020, FSB members convened every week—sometimes every day. Our staff in Basel regularly presented data for members to consider and discuss, in addition to members sharing their own jurisdiction-specific information and analysis. To provide deeper analysis for policymakers, the FSB formed several expert groups to examine and assess specific issues as they unfolded. This coordination helped enable the swift and bold interventions that maintained market functioning globally. Many of the supervisors in the FSB's membership provided banks with flexibility for their capital and liquidity buffers and encouraged banks to work with borrowers on loan modifications. The FSB also supported the delay of non-critical work to reduce the operational burden on firms and authorities. Collectively, these steps sent a strong signal about our resolve to lessen the economic fallout from the COVID event and helped prevent a disorderly sale of assets. The supervisors and the regulators in the FSB membership also convened more frequently to discuss market developments and to coordinate on the measures they were taking. The FSB also cataloged the thousands of steps our members took to respond to the COVID event so that a playbook of sorts is available for the future. Getting broad stakeholder input was also important to the FSB and to me personally, particularly given the varied impact of the COVID event and divergent paths to recovery. The FSB consulted directly with private-sector stakeholders, gathering input from academics, financial-sector participants, and trade associations. This input remains critical as we consider our path forward, including how to unwind emergency policy measures. Moving from Analysis to Action: Non-bank Financial Intermediation under the COVID LensA key lesson of the COVID event is that non-bank financial intermediation is a critical area for action—especially short-term funding markets, where the money market fund sector has more than $8 trillion in assets under management globally. During normal times, companies and retail investors treat shares in money market funds like cash—as fully fungible, riskless, and payable on-demand. But the funds' promise of liquidity and investors' resulting expectations are not always well-aligned with the liquidity of the instruments in which money funds invest. This misalignment—or "liquidity transformation"—creates incentives for money market fund investors to redeem when market liquidity becomes scarce. And that's exactly what happened during the COVID event. Runs on some types of money market funds in March of last year were similar in scale to the devastating runs in 2008 and again contributed to stress in systemically important short-term funding markets. Even before the COVID event, the FSB had assembled a senior group from central banks and market regulators to assess vulnerabilities in the non-bank sector and to coordinate and drive forward any needed reform. We were fortunate to have had this group in place when the COVID event brought these vulnerabilities into sharp focus. The FSB swiftly undertook a review of financial markets in March of 2020, which remains the most financially volatile and uncertain period of the COVID event. The FSB's November 2020 report to the G20, titledHolistic Review of the March Market Turmoil,set the stage for an ambitious work program aimed at enhancing resilience in non-bank financial intermediation.1 One of the first fruits of that program was published a week ago. Our report,Policy Proposals to Enhance Money Market Fund Resilience, sets out a framework for assessing vulnerabilities in money market funds and a policy toolkit.2Using the analysis of vulnerabilities contained in this report, each member will take a close look at the specific money fund vulnerabilities in its jurisdiction and will use the toolkit to address those vulnerabilities. To monitor for progress, the FSB, working with the International Organization of Securities Commissioners, will review members' progress in two years. In five years, the FSB will then do a more thorough assessment across our membership of the effectiveness of the measures in addressing risks to financial stability. The aim of this work is to enhance money market fund resilience and minimize the need for future extraordinary central bank interventions to support the sector. Lessons from the COVID EventThe lessons learned from the COVID event were not confined to the non-bank sector. In fact, the FSB is publishing a series of reports covering a broad range of topics related to the COVID event, including our interim findings on the lessons learned. The findings of that report, to be finalized later this month, will drive our future work agenda. Let me share a few of my own views on the key lessons learned. My first takeaway is that the global financial system entered the latest crisis more resilient than the last. Although extraordinary support measures were still necessary to mitigate the impact of the COVID event, the implementation of the G20-endorsed reforms from the last crisis helped contribute to our shared resilience. Basel III, which has led to a near doubling of capital ratios since 2011, positioned banks to better absorb the macroeconomic shock. In addition, derivatives markets are safer with better transparency, central clearing, and margin requirements. My second observation from the COVID event is the importance of policy flexibility for each of our jurisdictions. Of course, baseline consistency across standards is necessary. But indeed, one size rarely fits all. Our varied policy needs and tools make coordination even more important to achieving common goals and results. The global regulatory framework, done right, is like a tightly woven piece of fabric. It can get pulled in different directions at the same time, and it won't shred or unravel. In times of crisis, the warp and woof of policy tools across the globe need to be woven tightly enough for the fabric of our financial system to withstand the stress, but flexibly enough that it will not tear. Uncoordinated regulation can create flaws: gaps, fragmentation, and arbitrage opportunities, which are the types of defects the FSB strives to prevent. But excessively granular harmonization can create regulation that doesn't jibe with the circumstances in a particular jurisdiction. We try to ensure that our members are weaving a strong fabric in concert. A third observation is that there are instances where policy may fail to have the desired effect. I found banks' apparent reluctance to use buffers an interesting lesson from the COVID event. Some evidence suggests that banks may have been hesitant to use their regulatory capital buffers to meet credit demand (despite the stated intent from supervisors that banks should use their buffers under stress). This may be due to uncertainty regarding potential future losses or the wider market stigma that may result if a bank were to use its buffers. Perhaps the extensive fiscal and monetary support provided to borrowers averted banks' need to use buffers. Research into this reluctance will be important so that we can improve our macro- and micro-prudential tools for the next time we need them. Renewed Focus on 2022 and BeyondAs "normal" slowly returns, the FSB is setting upon the daunting task of refreshing its workplan. The FSB's comparative advantage lies in convening policymakers and experts to tackle cross-border and cross-sectoral threats to financial stability. Non-bank financial intermediation remains at the top of the FSB's priority list because of the urgency to address vulnerabilities. Our policy proposals for enhancing money market fund resilience give jurisdictions a good start on assessing and addressing vulnerabilities in their jurisdictions. Other areas, such as short-term funding markets, open-ended funds, and margin requirements, also require further assessment. The FSB is actively engaged in work in each of those areas. Even as we address the most acute vulnerabilities, the highly interconnected and innovative nature of our global financial system requires constant vigilance to ensure stability. The FSB must learn more about those risks to financial stability that are less well understood. One of these areas is climate-related financial risk. Although there is a vast amount of international work ongoing in this area, there remains much to learn about the climate-related complexities outside the financial system as well as within it. In light of the increasing amount of international work related to climate, the FSB has developed for the G20 a roadmap to help guide global efforts to understand and address the financial risks from climate change. Progress on the FSB's climate roadmap will depend on the collective efforts of the FSB, its membership of national authorities, and international organizations. It sets out in one place the way forward on disclosures, data, vulnerabilities analysis, and regulatory and supervisory approaches. The FSB is also closely watching cryptoassets and stablecoins. In the last 18 months, cryptoassets' market capitalization has grown from less than $200 billion to as much as $2.4 trillion. Stablecoins have increased from less than $10 billion in market cap to more than $130 billion. Almost exactly one year ago, in October 2020, the FSB released high-level recommendations for the regulation, supervision, and oversight of global stablecoin arrangements. Technology and innovation continue to advance rapidly. We need to be mindful of whether our regulatory and supervisory approaches appropriately address risks while preserving the benefits that innovation can bring. As these continue to develop, we continue to explore difficult questions. Are these digital assets currencies? Or securities? Deposits? They don't fit neatly into our regulatory buckets, and they operate in the digital ether where they can easily cross national borders. The FSB issued a new report last week to highlight our own findings as we monitor progress and seek to coordinate the regulation of global stablecoins. Digital assets may not be current threats to global financial stability. Yet as we've learned from some forms of non-bank financial intermediation, those products, services, and institutions that fall between the regulatory cracks one day can become systemic problems the next. The goal of our work is to guard against new risks that emerge from innovation without stifling this same innovation. Indeed, the global financial system's reliance on information technology remains a known risk, but one that has been well managed during the crisis. Technology has allowed us to coordinate and communicate more effectively throughout the COVID event. Virtual calls have quickly replaced in-person meetings. It may seem like second nature now, but we only dreamed of having this ability 20 years ago. While these advances bring us great benefits, financial authorities must remain highly vigilant to the ever-present risk of cyber-attacks on our financial system. As we remain vigilant to these known risks and vulnerabilities, the FSB last month rolled out a new forward-looking surveillance framework for monitoring and assessing vulnerabilities. The surveillance framework reflects the learning of the past decade and prepares us to face the challenges of an ever-evolving financial landscape. When the FSB was founded in the wake of the global financial crisis, the "science" of financial stability was still nascent. Now, more than a decade later, we have furthered our understanding of how financial crises result from shocks that act on existing vulnerabilities. This new framework will better account for resilience, our capacity to absorb shocks, in order to better appraise net vulnerabilities and identify gaps. It will also systematically scan the financial landscape to better capture new and emerging vulnerabilities and emphasize those that may prompt cross-border spillovers. The indicators will be dynamic and will include asset prices and asset quality, funding, liquidity, leverage, complexity, cross-border linkages, and operational considerations. The framework also incorporates monitoring of the balance sheets of non-financial sectors like households, corporates, and sovereigns. Along with these indicators, the new framework will obtain input for assessing vulnerabilities from qualitative surveys, working groups, and private sector workshops. It will preserve flexibility and recognize our members' inherent differences. I see the new surveillance framework as an important communication and framing device within the FSB, with the G20, and with the public. Unforeseeable and exogenous shocks, like COVID-19, will require us all to be resilient, vigilant, and agile. The FSB welcomes public comment and discussion regarding the new framework, and I expect it to be a useful construct for years to come. ConclusionIn conclusion, the COVID event was the first great test of the FSB, and I think we did the job we were born to do. I want to thank the many of you here today who are researching these issues, sharing your findings at conferences like this one, and enriching the work of the FSB. For our part, the FSB will continue convening G20 policymakers and experts to assess vulnerabilities, coordinate policy responses, and evaluate effectiveness. In doing so, we will always strive to consult with a wide variety of stakeholders to help us respond to the most pressing financial vulnerabilities of our time. Continued collaboration and cooperation among financial sectors, regulators, governments, academia, and international organizations will be one of our greatest advantages as we prepare for the next crisis. 1. Financial Stability Board,Holistic Review of the March Market Turmoil(Financial Stability Board, 2020).Return to text 2. Financial Stability Board,Policy Proposals to Enhance Money Market Fund Resilience, (Financial Stability Board, 2021).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At The Structured Finance Association Conference, Las Vegas, Nevada Now that business travel has started to pick back up as we emerge from the COVID event, a prosaic but insistent problem has reappeared: what to read on a long plane flight. Like most of you, I try to get some work done—but, also like most of you, out of an amalgam of security concerns and indolence, I often don't succeed. Something must improve the hours, but Kant is a little heavy, P.G. Wodehouse a little light, and T.S. Eliot looks like you're just showing off. So, over the last few weeks, I've been re-reading Joan Didion while making my way from point A to point B:Slouching Toward Bethlehem,The White Album, andWhere I Was From. As it turns out, Joan Didion is a particularly apt author to be reading on the way to this conference—not because the conference is being held in Las Vegas, although her four-page summation of this "most extreme and allegorical of American settlements" is a classic. But rather, because a nearly constant theme of her writing is change: how hard it is to recognize that things have changed; how hard it is to come to terms with it once recognized; how insistent people can be that surely, they will be OK. And given that introduction, I'm sure you have now guessed what I intend to talk to you about today: LIBOR, the benchmark formerly known as the London Interbank Offered Rate. LIBOR was the principal benchmark used to set interest rates for a vast number of commercial loans, mortgages, securities, derivatives, and other products. For a number of years—certainly at least since July of 2017, and really for several years before—it has been clear that LIBOR would end, but some believed it was not clear exactlywhenLIBOR would end. And, as a result, many market participants have continued to use LIBOR as if that end date would surely be in some indefinitely distant future, as if LIBOR would remain available forever. Earlier this year, however, things changed, and changed significantly. Two things happened which together make clear that LIBOR will no longer be available for any new contracts after the end of this year, just 86 days from now. First, the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates LIBOR, and ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA), which administers LIBOR, announced definitive end dates for LIBOR.1No U.S. dollar LIBOR tenors will be available after June 30, 2023.2 So, now there was a definitive and immovable date fixed for the end of LIBOR. However, the second thing that happened made clear that long before that end date in 2023, LIBOR would not be available for anynewcontracts after the end of this year. Following the FCA and IBA announcements about the end of LIBOR, the Federal Reserve and other regulators published guidance making clear that we will focus closely on whether supervised institutions stop new use of LIBOR by the end of this year—86 days from now. If LIBOR will not be available for new contracts, what is the point of IBA continuing to provide USD LIBOR quotes until mid-2023? Those LIBOR quotes will allow many existing contracts to mature according to their terms, thus greatly reducing the costs and risks of this transition. Otherwise, many banks would have had to re-negotiate hundreds of thousands of loan contracts before December 31, an almost impossible task. But the whole process only works if no new LIBOR contracts are written while the legacy contracts are allowed to mature. So, those new LIBOR contracts will not be made. Change is difficult, but it is inescapable. What is LIBOR, and Why is it Going Away?LIBOR was intended to be a measure of the average interest rate at which large banks can borrow in wholesale funding markets for different periods of time, ranging from overnight to one month, three months, and beyond. LIBOR is an unsecured rate, which means that it measures interest rates for borrowings that are made without collateral and therefore include some credit risk. At first blush, it may seem peculiar that a borrowing rate for banks in London has been used so widely. Why, for example, are more than $1 trillion of residential mortgagesin the United Statestied to LIBOR? The answer is that, over time, LIBOR's pervasiveness became self-reinforcing. Lenders, borrowers, and debt issuers relied on LIBOR because, first, everyone else used LIBOR, and second, they could hedge their LIBOR exposures in liquid derivatives markets. Today, USD LIBOR is used in more than $200 trillion of financial contracts worldwide. Federal Reserve officials have described LIBOR's flaws on numerous occasions.3The principal problem with LIBOR is that it was not what it purported to be. It claimed to be a measure of the cost of bank funding in the London money markets, but over time it became more of an arbitrary and sometimes self-interested announcement of what banks simply wished to charge for funds. That might not have become such a debacle had it been clear to everyone what the ground rules were, but the ground rules for LIBOR were anything but clear. As a result of subsequent changes to the process, LIBOR panel banks now provide evidence of actual transactions where possible. A fundamental problem, however, is that LIBOR has been unable to separate itself from its perception as a measure of bank funding costs, yet the market on which LIBOR is based—the unsecured, short-term bank funding market—dwindled after the 2008 financial crisis. This means that, for many LIBOR term rates, banks must estimate their likely cost of such funding rather than report the actual cost. Many LIBOR panel banks are uncomfortable estimating their funding costs in producing a benchmark perceived by many to measure actual funding costs. As a result, the great majority of the panel banks have determined that they will not continue participating in the process. This is why the FCA and IBA have announced definitive end dates for LIBOR. I should note here that regulators have warned about LIBOR-related risks for many years. Beginning in 2013, the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council and the international Financial Stability Board, which I currently chair, expressed concern that the decline in unsecured short-term funding by banks could pose serious structural risks for unsecured benchmarks such as LIBOR.4To mitigate these risks and promote a smooth transition away from LIBOR, the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) in November 2014.5As I will describe further in a moment, the ARRC has worked to facilitate the transition from LIBOR to its recommended alternative, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). Supervisory EffortsIn November 2020, the Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) sent a letter to the banking organizations we regulate noting that, after 2021, the use of LIBOR in new transactions would pose safety and soundness risks.6Accordingly, we encouraged supervised institutions to stop new use of LIBOR as soon as is practicable and, in any event, by the end of this year. The letter also noted that new contracts entered into before December 31, 2021, should either use a reference rate other than LIBOR or have robust fallback language that includes a clearly defined alternative reference rate after LIBOR's discontinuation. Recently, a number of institutions have asked what would qualify as "new" use of LIBOR after 2021. We are working with other agencies to provide additional guidance about this issue. In my view, however, "new" use of LIBOR would include any agreement that creates additional LIBOR exposure for a supervised institution or extends the term of an existing LIBOR contract. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve issued another supervisory letter that provided guidance concerning supervised institutions' LIBOR transition plans.7As the end of LIBOR approaches, Federal Reserve examiners have intensified their focus on supervised institutions' transition planning. In general, institutions of all sizes have acknowledged year-end as the stop date for new LIBOR contracts and are operationally prepared to offer alternative rates. However, based on data from the second quarter of 2021, we estimate that large firms used alternative rates for less than 1 percent of floating rate corporate loans and 8 percent of derivatives. To be ready for year-end, lenders will have to pick up the pace, and our examiners expect to see supervised institutions accelerate their use of alternative rates. Transitioning to Alternative RatesA handful of firms have said that they may want more time to evaluate potential alternative rates. There is no more time, and banks will not find LIBOR available to use after year-end no matter how unhappy they may be with their options to replace it. I would note that the ARRC has been publishing tools to facilitate the use of SOFR for almost four years.8SOFR is a broad measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by Treasury securities. It rests on one of the deepest and most liquid markets in the world. It is calculated transparently by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, engendering market confidence. And it can be used for all types of transactions. Notably, the ARRC recently recommended SOFR term rates, which will facilitate the transition from LIBOR to SOFR for market participants who wish to use a forward-looking rate.9Given the availability of SOFR, including term SOFR, there will be no reason for a bank to use LIBOR after 2021 while trying to find a rate it likes better. This is especially true for capital markets products. As I described recently in remarks to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, it is critical that capital markets and derivatives markets transition to SOFR. Market participants have expressed nearly universal agreement that this is the right replacement rate for such products.10The ARRC did not recommend any other rate for capital markets or derivatives, and market participants should not expect such rates to be widely available. Loans, however, are different from derivatives and capital markets products, and raise different issues. With respect to loans, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC issued a letter last year explaining that we have not endorsed a specific replacement rate.11We have not changed that guidance. A bank may use SOFR for its loans, but it may also use any reference rate for its loans that the bank determines to be appropriate for its funding model and customer needs. But a bank will not find LIBOR available after year-end, even if it doesn't want to use SOFR for loans and hasn't chosen a different alternative reference rate. Reviewing banks' cessation of LIBOR use after year-end will be one of the highest priorities of the Fed's bank supervisors in the coming months. If market participants do use a rate other than SOFR, they should ensure that they understand how their chosen reference rate is constructed, that they are aware of any fragilities associated with that rate, and—most importantly—that they use strong fallback provisions. To conclude, I emphasize that market participants should be ready to stop using LIBOR by the end of 2021.12One-week and two-month USD LIBOR will end in only 12 weeks. The remaining USD LIBOR tenors will end in mid-2023, but the LIBOR quotes available from January 2022 until June 2023 will only be appropriate for legacy contracts. Use of these quotes for new contracts would create safety and soundness risks for counterparties and the financial system. We will supervise firms accordingly. Market participants should act now to accelerate their transition away from LIBOR. The reign of LIBOR will end imminently, and it will not come back. To return to where we started, the year of magical thinking is over. 1. Seehttps://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/announcements-end-liborandhttps://ir.theice.com/press/news-details/2021/ICE-Benchmark-Administration-Publishes-Feedback-Statement-for-the-Consultation-on-Its-Intention-to-Cease-the-Publication-of-LIBOR-Settings/default.aspx.Return to text 2. One-week and two-month U.S. dollar LIBOR tenors will end as of December 30, 2021. IBA will cease publishing all remaining U.S. dollar LIBOR rates after June 30, 2023.Return to text 3. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20190410a.htm,https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20140904a.htm, andhttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/vanderweide20210415a.htm.Return to text 4. SeeFinancial Stability Oversight Council,2013 Annual Report(PDF)(Washington: Department of the Treasury, 2013).See alsoFinancial Stability Board,Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks(PDF)(Basel, Switzerland: Financial Stability Board, July 2014).Return to text 5. The ARRC's voting members are private sector firms, but the Federal Reserve and other official sector entities serve as ex-officio members of the ARRC.Return to text 6. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20201130a.htm.Return to text 7. See SR 21-7, "Assessing Supervised Institutions' Plans to Transition Away from the Use of the LIBOR." Earlier this year, I gave a speech that described this supervisory letter in detail.See alsohttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20210322a.htm.Return to text 8. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York began publishing SOFR in April 2018.Return to text 9. Seehttps://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/Microsites/arrc/files/2021/ARRC_Press_Release_Term_SOFR.pdf.Return to text 10. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/files/quarles-libor-presentation-20210611.pdf.Return to text 11. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2025.htm.Return to text 12. The Federal Reserve recognizes that market participants cannot fix some legacy LIBOR contracts. In particular, there are approximately $10 trillion of so-called "tough" legacy contracts that mature after LIBOR ends, but lack workable fallback language to address the end of LIBOR. The Federal Reserve welcomes efforts in Congress to craft federal legislation that would provide a workable fallback for these contracts.Return to text
Governor Randal K. Quarles At the 2021 Milken Institute Global Conference "Charting a New Course," Beverly Hills, California Thank you to the Milken Institute for the opportunity to join you today. This morning I'd like to outline my view of current economic conditions and the economic outlook and then turn to the implications for monetary policy. In particular, with employment still well below its February 2020 peak, I will focus on how the escalation in inflation this year is testing the monetary policy framework adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in August 2020.1 Outlook for Economic GrowthRecent data suggest that growth in the third quarter is likely to be lower than we had expected, but the foundations remain in place for strong economic growth over the remainder of this year and next. Employment is growing, financial conditions are accommodative, businesses are investing, and households, in the aggregate, have a large stock of savings to draw on for future spending. Weaker growth in payrolls in August and September, along with uneven consumer spending in July and August, appear to reflect ongoing concerns in some parts of the country about the spread of COVID-19, especially in high-contact service industries. Supply bottlenecks and labor shortages that have been more widespread and persistent than many expected are camouflaging continued strong underlying demand for goods, services, and workers. Supply constraints are particularly evident in interest-sensitive parts of the economy, such as residential investment and vehicle sales, limiting the scope for additional monetary accommodation to stimulate activity in those sectors. I expect that these developments, however, have for the most part simply postponed activity temporarily and that robust growth will return in the coming months. There is evidence in recent weeks that we seem to be moving into a new phase of the economy. Nominal retail sales rose seven-tenths of 1 percent in September on the heels of a nine-tenths increase in August, an indication that consumers kept up their pace of spending. Robust business investment in equipment and intangibles continued in the second quarter, and indicators suggest another gain in the third quarter. Forward indicators of business spending and the need for firms to replenish depleted inventories point to strong investment into next year. The Labor Market Continues to StrengthenWithout a doubt, the headline job gains in August and September were lower than expected, but, as I will show, based on almost every other major labor market indicator, there is ample evidence that the demand for labor is strong. At last measure, the Labor Department reported that job openings remained near a record high in August, and a record number of workers were voluntarily quitting their jobs, an indicator of their confidence in finding a better one. Other measures of job openings by education level indicate that jobs are plentiful even for less-skilled workers who have been affected the most by the COVID event. Another indicator I've been watching closely is the so-called U-6 unemployment rate, which consists of people who are working part time but prefer full-time work and discouraged workers who want a job but have given up looking. U-6 unemployment declined significantly over the past two months to 8.5 percent in September, roughly the same level as in the middle of 2017, when most everyone considered the job market to be quite healthy. In fact—and this will not be news to most of you—shortages of skilled workers in many occupations predated the COVID event and are likely to persist after its effects have faded. Some of this shortage reflects the aging of the workforce, changes in the types of jobs people want to do, and the time it takes to train workers. Strong demand for labor is outpacing supply, and, naturally, that development is putting upward pressure on wages. Through September, average hourly wages are up 4.6 percent over the past 12 months, the largest and most sustained increase in wages for workers since the 1990s. I noted the imbalance between the demand and supply for labor, and some of the labor market indicators that are still well short of pre-COVID levels are those related to labor force participation, which has been about unchanged this year on balance. I expect that as conditions normalize, this measure will pick up, but it is unlikely to return to its February 2020 level. One reason is that a disproportionate number of older workers responded to the initial shock of the COVID event by retiring, which may be an area where participation and employment struggle to retrace lost ground. Longer-lasting changes in labor force participation could make wage pressures more persistent and have implications for the assessment of maximum employment. Tapering Asset PurchasesSince the middle of last year, the Fed has been increasing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities by $120 billion a month to foster smooth market functioning and to support the economy by putting downward pressure on interest rates. Conditions had improved considerably by the time we announced our forward guidance for asset purchases in December, but the unemployment rate remained at 6.7 percent, near-term growth was being constrained by heightened social-distancing restrictions amid surging hospitalizations from COVID-19, and inflation was running significantly below 2 percent. As we sit here today, demand for labor is strong, and unemployment has declined to 4.8 percent. We have exceeded the previous high for real gross domestic product and are close to reaching the pre-COVID trend. Inflation, about which I will say more shortly, is running at more than twice the FOMC's longer-run goal. Taking all of the evidence into account, I think it is clear that we have met the test of substantial further progress toward both our employment and our inflation mandates, and I would support a decision at our November meeting to start reducing these purchases and complete that process by the middle of next year. Bear in mind that asset purchases are pressing down on the accelerator, adding each month to the amount of accommodation the Fed is providing to the economy through downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. Reducing purchases and ending them on this schedule is not monetary tightening, but a gradual reduction in the pace at which we are adding accommodation. Monetary Policy When the Goals Are Not ComplementaryA move to reduce the pace of asset purchases soon also is entirely consistent with the FOMC's plan to pursue our longer-run maximum-employment and price-stability goals, and our new monetary policy strategy, which we refer to as our framework. The forward guidance that we put in place for asset purchases was an operationalization of the new framework. Last December, with inflation running well below 2 percent and unemployment still elevated, we committed to continue purchasing assets at least at the current pace until we had made substantial further progress toward our goals. In most situations, those goals are complementary. That is, high unemployment usually coincides with subdued inflationary pressures. Therefore, at the time, we did not foresee those goals coming into conflict. But we are facing a situation now where inflation is high even though employment has yet to fully recover from the COVID event. In that case, according to the FOMC's monetary policy framework, when objectives are not complementary, the Committee "takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate."2 Applying those principles throughout 2021, we have been very patient and focused on the need for the labor market to recover as quickly as practicable from the severe damage experienced during the darkest days of the COVID event. We are remaining patient because, despite some periods of rapid progress, the recovery in jobs has been uneven and is still incomplete. Early on, patience was easy: In December of last year, my FOMC colleagues and I were expecting much lower inflation—the median projection for 2021 by FOMC participants was 1.8 percent. The FOMC's preferred inflation gauge did not crack 2 percent until March 2021. But, by June, prices had risen 4 percent over the previous 12 months, ticked up to 4.2 percent in July, and increased further to 4.3 percent in August. The median of the most recent projections by FOMC participants traces a path in which inflation ends the year just a touch lower than the current level. Nonetheless, I do not see the FOMC as behind the curve, for three reasons: Most of the biggest drivers of the very high current inflation rates will ease in coming quarters, some measures of underlying inflation pressures are less worrisome, and longer-term inflation expectations are anchored, at least for now. First, let me address the big drivers of this year's price increases. The inflation we have experienced so far has been very unusual and largely related to supply constraints associated both with production and distribution problems related to COVID and with a demand shock arising from the unprecedented and rapid reopening of the economy. We all saw the remarkable price increases and shortages in the used car market. There have been a few other very specific and identifiable supply problems that have driven some other prices to very high levels—the semiconductor shortages that led to auto production slowdowns, for example, and, in some cases, labor shortages or restrictions related to the COVID event were associated with trade disruptions. Second, if we recognize that much of the excessive inflation we are seeing this year is directly attributable to disruptions that, like the COVID event, will end, then monetary policy often can look through those types of disruptions to consider what inflation will be in the future when this episode passes. To get a fix on where inflation is headed, it is helpful to consider measures of inflation that try to filter out the most unusual and presumably transitory price increases that may be driving headline inflation. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas's trimmed mean measure of inflation systematically removes prices that are increasing or decreasing at abnormally large rates, in order to get some perspective on underlying inflation pressures. For the 12 months through August, the Dallas trimmed mean inflation was an even 2 percent. Of course, while this metric may provide a better indicator of future PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation, I do not mean to suggest that this is necessarily a better reading on current inflation—consumers and businesses have to pay for the goods whose prices have risen sharply, and those increases are being felt. That brings us to the third reason that I do not think the FOMC is behind the curve: anchored inflation expectations. We monitor longer-term expectations of future inflation because we believe they influence changes in actual inflation over the medium term. In fact, our new framework recognizes that stable, well-anchored inflation expectations help return inflation to 2 percent when it is running high, as it is now, as well as when it has fallen somewhat below that goal, as it often does during a recession. So far, market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, as well as surveys of professional forecasters, have increased only moderately this year, moves that more or less reversed declines in those expectations over the previous half-dozen years. Measuring expectations is an inexact science, but smoothing through the ups and downs in expectations in recent years leaves these indicators within a range that has been consistent with inflation near our 2 percent goal. How Long is Too Long?Going forward, the question is not only whether inflation will fall in the coming months, but also how far it will fall and if it will fall soon enough to avoid spurring a concerning rise in longer-term inflation expectations. I agree with my FOMC colleagues and most private forecasters that inflation likely will decline considerably next year from its currently very elevated rate. For instance, most of the September Summary of Economic Projections forecasts for PCE inflation in 2022 were between 1.9 and 2.3 percent, with a minimum of 1.7 percent and a maximum of 3.0 percent.3But I see significant upside risks to my current inflation outlook. Supply constraints in production and distribution already have become more widespread and have lasted longer than most forecasters anticipated. As noted earlier, labor supply constraints are making it difficult for businesses to keep up with demand. This dynamic will continue to support robust wage growth, putting further upward pressure on prices. Moreover, there is evidence in the past couple of months that a broader range of prices are beginning to increase at moderate rates, and I am closely watching those developments. The fundamental dilemma that we face at the Fed right now is this: Demand, augmented by unprecedented fiscal stimulus, has been outstripping a temporarily disrupted supply, leading to high inflation. But the fundamental productive capacity of our economy as it existed just before COVID—and, thus, the ability to satisfy that demand without inflation—remains largely as it was, and the factors that are disrupting it appear to be transitory. Looked at purely in that light, constraining demand now, to bring it into line with a transiently interrupted supply, would be premature. Given the lags with which monetary policy acts, we could easily find that demand is damping just as supply is increasing, leading us to undershoot our inflation target—and, in the worst case, we could depress the incentives for supply to return, leading to an extended period of sluggish activity and unnecessarily low employment. But "transitory" does not necessarily mean "short lived." Indeed, we are discovering that it's going to take more time than we had thought for supply to return to normal, and with demand already high during that time, I am monitoring the extent to which it could be further boosted by the additional fiscal programs currently under discussion. If those dynamics should lead this "transitory" inflation to continue too long, it could affect the planning of households and businesses and unanchor their inflation expectations. This could spark a wage-price spiral that would not settle down even when the logistical bottlenecks and supply chain kinks have eased. So the central question we have to answer is "How long is too long?" I am among those who see a good chance that inflation will remain above 2 percent next year, but I am not quite ready to conclude that this "transitory" period is already "too long." We haven't yet met the more stringent tests for liftoff that we have laid out in forward guidance about the federal funds rate. Let me quote from the latest FOMC statement: Raising rates will not be appropriate "until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time."4Importantly, the level of uncertainty around the paths for inflation and employment are higher than normal as we navigate the unprecedented reopening of the world economy. Therefore, we will remain outcome based, waiting to see further improvements in employment and the evolution of inflation pressures in coming months. And, if the broadly held expectation that inflation will recede next year turns out to be wrong or if inflation expectations show signs of becoming unanchored to the upside, I am confident that the monetary policy tools at our disposal can bring inflation down toward our 2 percent goal. How High Is Too High?I said just now that the central question is "How long is too long?" I am also keenly aware, however, that inflation of 4 percent or more certainly cannot be characterized as only "moderately" above 2 percent, and thus we also have to deal with the question of "How high is too high?" Moreover, the two questions are obviously related: we can tolerate inflation of 2.5 percent as supply returns to normal without dramatically affecting inflation expectations, for a much longer period than we can tolerate inflation of 4.5 percent. So, how high is too high? I cannot speak for my FOMC colleagues on this issue, but I will conclude with some thoughts of my own. In 2012, the FOMC formally adopted a longer-run inflation target of 2 percent, and since then, that target has been reaffirmed annually by the Committee including in our new framework adopted in August 2020.5The key innovations in the new framework relative to the previous incarnation are designed primarily to address the risk that inflation and inflation expectations could settle below our 2 percent target. That risk emanates from the understanding that several longer-run changes in the U.S. economy may have conspired to reduce the level of the equilibrium federal funds rate—the level at which it is neither slowing nor speeding up economic activity. In turn, a lower average level of interest rates would make it more difficult, on balance, for the Federal Reserve to respond to negative shocks to the economy with sizable cuts to interest rates. The inability to cut interest rates sufficiently can then reinforce downward pressures on inflation such that it begins to run persistently below the FOMC's 2 percent goal and causes inflation expectations to fall with it. As is well known by now, those revisions to the Fed's monetary policy framework put new emphasis on reaching maximum employment and introduced new flexibility in how to account for progress toward our price-stability goal by seeking inflation that averages 2 percent over time to ensure longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored at this level. This revision implies that monetary policy will provide more support for economic activity over a typical business cycle than had been the case, in order to prevent longer-term inflation expectations—and, ultimately, inflation itself—from settling below 2 percent. In this low interest rate environment, some researchers have suggested going further than our current framework does in allowing inflation to run moderately above 2 percent for some time following periods where it has run persistently lower than 2 percent, and actually raising the inflation target to 2.5 percent or 3 percent or even 4 percent.6At the outset of our recently completed review, we reaffirmed that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with our congressional mandate for price stability.7I believe that any future discussion of a higher target would need to address whether it remained consistent with that congressional mandate. I would also emphasize that at this point, the public is very accustomed to a world of inflation near 2 percent, which has allowed households and businesses to operate with considerable certainty. Research shows that such certainty is valuable for households and businesses to make sound financial decisions and to avoid economic distortions that could hinder economic growth.8 My strong support for our consensus framework is predicated not only upon its new features designed to address inflation that falls too low, but also its commitment to prevent longer-term inflation expectations from rising materially above a level consistent with our 2 percent goal. In this sense, the current elevated rates of inflation are not challenging our new framework any more than they would have challenged our previous framework or, for that matter, most reasonable frameworks for conducting monetary policy. As I said earlier, when our price-stability and employment goals are not complementary, the framework calls for policy to depend on the remaining shortfall from our maximum-employment goal, on the extent to which inflation continues to exceed 2 percent, and on the amount of time we expect it will take for employment and inflation to meet our goals. I remain quite optimistic about the capacity and willingness of consumers and businesses to power a robust expansion as we put the COVID event behind us, even with the headwinds coming from the supply side. But that forecast for growth and uncertainty about the resolution of supply constraints mean that there are upside risks to inflation next year. So my focus is beginning to turn more fully from the rapidly improving labor market to whether inflation begins its descent toward levels that are more consistent with our price-stability mandate, as most forecasters and most of my colleagues on the FOMC expect over the next year. I would also be quite wary of further increases in inflation expectations in this environment. If inflation does remain more than moderately above 2 percent, be assured that the FOMC has the framework and the tools to address it. 1. All of my remarks today represent my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, paragraph 6, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 3. The September 2021 Summary of Economic Projections is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 4. See the September 2021 FOMC statement, paragraph 4, which can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htmReturn to text 5. See the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," in note 2.Return to text 6. See Lawrence M. Ball (2013), "The Case for Four Percent Inflation,"Central Bank Review,vol. 13 (May), pp. 17–31; and Philippe Andrade, Jordi Galí, Hervé Le Bihan, and Julien Matheron (2019), "The Optimal Inflation Target and the Natural Rate of Interest,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 173–255.Return to text 7. See Richard H. Clarida (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices." speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 22.Return to text 8. See Engin Kara and Tony Yates (2021), "A Case against a 4% Inflation Target,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 53 (August), pp. 1097–1119.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from August 23 through September 22, 2021. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 21–22, 2021. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 21–22, 2021:HTML|PDF
Climate change poses significant challenges for the global economy and the financial system. The public rightly expects us to work to ensure the financial system is resilient to climate-related financial risks. We appreciate the magnitude of the challenges ahead of us and the Federal Reserve is committed to doing our part. I want to thank FSOC for their work on this comprehensive report, which I support. Its recommendations highlight areas where additional work and coordination are needed to increase our collective understanding of climate-related financial risks. The report also emphasizes the need for consistent and comparable data and disclosures, something I particularly appreciate as fundamental to a rigorous and thorough analysis of climate-related risks. The report cites scenario analysis -- where the resilience of financial institutions and the financial system are assessed under different hypothetical climate scenarios -- as an emerging tool in assessing climate-related financial risks. We at the Fed are developing a program of scenario analysis to evaluate the potential economic and financial risks posed by different climate outcomes. The Federal Reserve will address climate-related risks in an analytically rigorous, transparent, and collaborative way. With the creation of the Supervision Climate Committee and the Financial Stability Climate Committee, we are working to better understand and address climate-related risks for financial institutions and the broader financial system. This work will provide the foundation for the development of an appropriate program to evaluate whether supervised firms are resilient to those risks. We will also continue to identify links between climate change and financial stability, including by investigating how climate change can increase financial-sector vulnerabilities and looking for climate-related amplification channels. Given the global impact of climate change, the FSOC report stresses the significant work being done by international organizations, including the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System, the Financial Stability Board, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The Federal Reserve is active and, in many cases, plays a leading role in the climate-related work being done by these institutions, and I am confident we will continue to contribute to and help shape these international efforts to address climate-related financial risks. We will share our progress and look forward to coordinating with our FSOC colleagues in meeting the critical challenges outlined in the report. As we advance in our understanding of the financial stability risks associated with climate change and gain experience with policies to strengthen the system, we will continue to work together with our domestic and international colleagues to sharpen our responses. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Associates Meeting, Stanford, California (via webcast) Thank you to the institute for the opportunity to speak to you. Today my goal is to explain my outlook for the U.S. economy as well as how that perspective shapes my views on the appropriate approach to monetary policy.1I have three points I would like you to take away from my comments. First, while there has been a significant slowdown in third quarter gross domestic product (GDP) growth, it should rebound in the first half of 2022. Second, I believe that substantial progress has been made on both the inflation and employment legs of our dual mandate. Hence, I believe that we should soon commence tapering our asset purchases. Finally, the next several months are critical for assessing whether the high inflation numbers we have seen are transitory. If monthly prints of inflation continue to run high through the remainder of this year, a more aggressive policy response than just tapering may well be warranted in 2022. In terms of economic growth, data for the third quarter of 2021 show that the economic recovery slowed as the effects of the Delta variant caused consumers and businesses to start pulling back on some forms of economic activity such as travel and leisure. Measures of consumer mobility, which are a good indicator of spending, grew strongly starting last winter but then started falling in June, around when the effects of Delta started to become significant. I and most other forecasters expected that real GDP would grow close to the very strong rate posted in the first half of the year, but it now appears that GDP growth will be closer to 3 percent at an annual rate. The two major causes of this slowdown have been the extent of the economic effects of the Delta surge and the extent of supply constraints, both of which had larger effects than I and most forecasters expected. That was due to both the disappointingly low levels of vaccination in some areas and how highly contagious Delta proved to be. Meanwhile, we have seen labor shortages in many regions and many sectors that seem unwarranted given the level of unemployment and other indicators of slack in the labor market. And supply constraints have been very widespread, with many causes, only some of them directly related to COVID-19. U.S. imports have been disrupted both at the point of export and at U.S. ports, with backups at major ports larger than some have ever experienced. Thus, a lack of inputs and a lack of labor to use them have created a dramatic headwind for GDP. Fortunately, there is already evidence that the Delta surge has begun to wane and, with the reopening of schools (and the expectation that they will remain open in most areas), that the worst effects of Delta, medically and economically, may be behind us. Likewise, fears that Delta would lead health officials to mandate more severe business restrictions have not materialized. Furthermore, the spread of the Delta variant has raised vaccination rates even in areas where they had been low, which will help contain the spread of the Delta variant. All of this recent experience encourages me to believe that the moderation in the expansion of economic activity in recent months that is directly related to the Delta surge will be a temporary phenomenon. I expect that this slowdown has only delayed the economic recovery into the first half of 2022, and thus I moved what I thought would be strong growth in the second half of this year into the first half of next year. This delay means that my medium-term outlook for economic growth really has not changed much at all, and that I forecast the strong recovery will continue. The Labor Market Is HealingLet me now turn to the recent job reports. For the month of August, I and many forecasters expected the economy would create 700,000 jobs or more, but the initial number came in at a disappointing 235,000. Hopes turned to September, but that report disappointed as well, with 194,000 jobs created. Despite these unexpectedly low numbers, there is still some good news from the September report—namely, that the disappointing number was due to unexpected declines in employment by state and local governments that may be attributed to limited labor supply that will work itself out in coming months. Private payrolls increased a healthy 317,000 jobs in September, and the July and August payrolls were revised up by 169,000 jobs. Nevertheless, the numbers are concerning, given that as many as 8 million workers may have rolled off unemployment insurance programs in September. It is difficult to imagine that, going forward, these workers will continue to remain on the sidelines. This suggests we may be in for very healthy job gains in the last quarter of this year as these workers begin to fill the enormous number of available jobs. The September jobs report also showed the unemployment rate falling four-tenths of 1 percent, from 5.2 percent to 4.8 percent. It is striking that, in 16 months, the unemployment rate has fallen from 14.8 percent in April 2020 to just 4.8 percent now. So we are clearly most of the way back to the very strong labor market that we achieved before the pandemic. However, one data series, such as the unemployment rate, is insufficient at capturing the overall status of the labor market. Our assessment of the labor market must be broad based, which is why I look at more comprehensive measures of labor market health. Two that I find particularly useful are the Atlanta Fed's labor market distributions spider chart and the Kansas City Fed's Labor Market Conditions Indicators.2The Kansas City chart nicely condenses 24 different measures of the labor market, and the index is now above its long-run historical value. The Atlanta Fed spider chart shows where each of 15 labor market indicators sits relative to different dates, such as February 2020 and September 2021. The spider chart reveals that 9 of the 15 indicators, including those for wages and job openings, are either better than February 2020 or nearly as good. Consequently, both broad measures of labor market performance reveal a significant degree of healing in the U.S. labor market. Now let me focus on the Federal Reserve's goals for monetary policy. As the minutes of the September Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting conveyed, many participants judge that we have achieved substantial progress on our inflation goal.3With regard to substantial further progress on our employment objective, I believe we have now met that criterion despite the disappointing jobs reports for August and September. We lost 22 million jobs during the early months of the pandemic recession. Two million of those jobs are likely gone forever due to early retirements. We have now regained approximately 17 million of those jobs, or 85 percent of what was lost after adjusting for early retirements. Furthermore, the September unemployment rate of 4.8 percent is not that far from the 3.5 percent unemployment rate that was realized in February 2020. In summary, the labor market has experienced a healthy recovery, but it is not fully healed. While there is still room to improve on the employment leg of our mandate, I believe we have made enough progress such that tapering of our asset purchases should commence following our next FOMC meeting, which is in two weeks. InflationInflation has been running higher this year than I and most forecasters expected. It has not been high for just a month or two—it has been high all year. It is important to acknowledge that. The unexpected inflation we have observed has raised costs for households and businesses and complicated their planning, which has a real effect on people's lives. For the Fed, the question is whether higher inflation this year undermines moving toward our economic goals. On that score, I continue to believe that the escalation of inflation will be transitory and that inflation will move back toward our 2 percent target next year. That said, I am still greatly concerned about the upside risk that elevated inflation will not prove temporary. Wehaveseen substantial increases in many prices. Lumber prices skyrocketed through May but have largely retraced that increase in the past few months. Prices for used cars rose substantially from mid-2020 to mid-2021 but now seem to have stabilized at this higher level. At present, I am closely watching prices for housing services (rent and owners' equivalent rent), which saw modest increases last year but have picked up recently. In addition, energy prices have moved up noticeably in recent months, and market conditions suggest risk of further increases. As I said earlier, I still see supply and demand working here to moderate price increases so that inflation moves back toward 2 percent. But I also see some upside pressures on inflation that bear watching. Bottlenecks have been worse and are lasting longer than I and most forecasters expected, and an important question that no one knows the answer to is how long these supply problems will persist. Through our business contacts, we continue to hear stories about bottlenecks at almost every stage of production and distribution—for example, plants that shut down because of a shortage of one or more crucial inputs; a poor cotton crop in the United States due to weather, which is driving up prices; and clogged ports and trucker shortages. Meanwhile, wage gains have been strong. That apparently has not made its way into prices yet, but how long before it becomes a factor driving inflation? Firms are reporting that they have more pricing power now than they have had in many years, as consumers seem to be accepting higher prices. The simple answer is that I believe the next few months will be crucial to understanding whether elevated rates of inflation last and if that will trigger a lasting effect on the U.S. economy. We will know more as time goes on about whether inflation in the prices of those goods and services will level off or even fall, as lumber prices have, and how other prices will evolve. But, importantly, we will also know whether this period of higher inflation has started to affect expectations of future inflation. A critical aspect of our new framework is to allow inflation to run above our 2 percent target (so that it averages 2 percent), but we should do this only if inflation expectations are consistent with our 2 percent target. If inflation expectations become unanchored, the credibility of our inflation target is at risk, and we likely would need to take action to re-anchor expectations at our 2 percent target. This raises a couple of key questions: Whose inflation expectations do we examine, and how do we determine if they are unanchored? With regard to the first question, we measure inflation expectations two ways. First, we survey the public and ask them what they expect the inflation rate to be in coming years. The University of Michigan household survey and the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations are examples of this "survey approach." Second, we can infer inflation expectations from differences in yields between Treasury securities that are indexed for inflation and those that are not. These breakeven inflation measures from the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities market are referred to as "market based" measures of inflation compensation. Survey measures give us an idea of what the average household expects inflation to be in the coming years. Presumably, this measure of expectations is important because it should influence households' wage demands as they seek compensation for an increasing cost of living. A key drawback of these measures is that the respondent incurs no benefit or cost from the accuracy of their forecast. This is why I have always preferred market-based measures of inflation expectations, because they are formed by investors who are betting with real money about future inflation. In short, they have skin in the game. This brings us to another question: Are inflation expectations anchored around our inflation target of 2 percent? Survey measures have shown a dramatic increase in inflation expectations over the past few months. The recent New York Fed measure has short- and medium-term inflation expectations at 5.3 percent and 4.2 percent, respectively. This is eye opening and a genuine cause for concern should households embed these expectations in wage demands. However, market-based measures of inflation expectations and the five-year inflation expectations from the New York Fed survey continue to be anchored near our 2 percent target. I also look at the Board of Governors staff's common inflation expectations measure, which distills a signal from both surveys and market-based inflation gauges. At this point, at least, it remains near its average over the past decade. This gives me some comfort that the recent run of high inflation readings has not led to an unanchoring of inflation expectations. It is important to account for all measures of inflation expectations and not "cherry pick" the measure that one finds most comforting. I would like to follow up on this last point as it pertains to thinking about inflation. As I mentioned earlier, a lot of commentators, including me, have deflected concerns about high inflation readings being the result of "outliers" or "idiosyncratic" price movements. As a result, recent high inflation readings are transitory and not broad based. But there is a fallacy in doing so that one should avoid in judging whether higher inflation is indeed transitory. A basic tendency of statistical analysis is to exclude outlying or more volatile data. There are sound reasons for this, such as when we exclude volatile food and energy prices to get a measure of "core" inflation; that kind of measure often is more stable and can tell us whether the underlying forces behind inflation are moving as rapidly as it might seem from headline inflation. A similar logic applies to trimmed mean measures of inflation, such as the Cleveland Fed trimmed mean consumer price index and the Dallas Fed trimmed mean PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation rate. These measures censor the tails of the price change distribution to avoid having average inflation distorted by extreme price movements. However, inflation is distilled from many prices, and those prices do not move uniformly. As a result, we may be led to "falsely" dismiss certain price movements and risk being misled as to the true inflation rate. Let me use a simple example to illustrate this point. Consider a three-good economy with goods A, B and C, and look at how their prices increase over time. In one world, the price of each good goes up 2 percent every year. Thus, average inflation is 2 percent every year, and there is no reason to question that measure, as it is broad based. This is typically what we have in mind when we think about trend inflation. In this world, inflation is meeting the FOMC's 2 percent target and there is no need for a policy change. Now consider a world in which there are sharp price changes that are staggered across the goods. In year 1, the price of good A goes up 5 percent, while the price of goods B and C increase 2 percent. If we assume equal weights for each good, the inflation rate for this economy is 3 percent. This repeats in year 2, with the price of good B increasing 5 percent while the other two have increases of 2 percent. In year 3, good C sees the largest increase. In this economy, inflation averages 3 percent each year, which is above the FOMC's 2 percent inflation target. Now, one could look at this data and manipulate it in several common ways. First, if one used a trimmed-mean measure of inflation, you would throw out the highest and the lowest readings for each year. What do you get? The average inflation rate would be 2 percent every year. Thus, over a three-year period, a trimmed mean measure of inflation would be 2 percent and indicate we are hitting our inflation target when the true measure would be 3 percent per year. A second way of manipulating the data is to say in year 1, "Look, inflation is being driven by good A, which had an idiosyncratic, outsized price increase. If you throw it out, the underlying inflation rate is 2 percent." Then in year 2, you say, "Good B had an idiosyncratic price increase, so throw it out." Repeat for year 3. Again, by selectively throwing out unusually high price increases for individual goods, you would conclude that inflation over the three-year period is 2 percent and we are hitting the inflation target when, in fact, it was 3 percent. Third, one can justify throwing out good A in the first year by saying it did not reflect a broad-based price increase—the prices of 67 percent of the goods rose 2 percent. So, based on these goods, we are hitting our inflation target. You would be correct but, again, misguided. Finally, one could claim, correctly, that the large price increase for good A is "transitory"—it went up strikingly in year 1 but then dropped back, meaning inflation should fall back to our inflation target in coming periods. But that will mislead you in terms of understanding the true inflation rate, because you are putting zero probability that a large spike in inflation will happen to another good in the future. The moral of this little example is that one needs to be careful when selectively ignoring data series—be it used car prices, food and energy prices, or household surveys of inflation expectations. All of these series convey important information about the evolution of inflation, and one should exhibit caution in dismissing data as outliers. We must keep our eyes open to inflationary pressures, wherever they come from, with consistency and rigor and stand ready to adjust policy if we conclude that such a change is warranted. This brings me to how I believe monetary policy should evolve in the coming months, based on the outlook I have described. The near-term decision we face is when to begin slowing the pace of asset purchases, which have each month been adding to the level of financial accommodation provided by the Fed to support the economy. Our test for this step was making "substantial further progress" toward our employment and inflation goals. After years of running below 2 percent, the recent and sustained increase in inflation clearly represents substantial progress toward our goal. And the continued gains in employment, despite a couple of months of a slowdown, along with results across a range of labor market indicators, indicate to me that there has also been substantial further progress toward maximum employment. I support the FOMC beginning to reduce asset purchases following our meeting in November. Importantly, this action should not tighten financial conditions, since a later 2021 tapering has already been priced in by most participants. One issue on which we should also be clear is the pace of tapering. I have said in the past that I favor a pace of tapering that would result in the end of asset purchases by the middle of 2022. Of course, if economic conditions and the outlook were to deteriorate significantly, we could slow or pause this tapering. And if the economy were to strengthen more than expected, the plan to rapidly end purchases would provide policy space in 2022 to act sooner than now anticipated to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate. Based on my outlook for the economy, however, I do not expect liftoff to occur soon after tapering is completed. The two policy actions are distinct. I believe the pace of continued improvement in the labor market will be gradual, and I expect inflation will moderate, which means liftoff is still some time off. That said, as I mentioned earlier, if my upside risk for inflation comes to pass, with inflation considerably above 2 percent well into 2022, then I will favor liftoff sooner than I now anticipate. A major consideration will be my judgment about whether inflation expectations are at risk of becoming "unanchored"—rising substantially and persistently above 2 percent. My FOMC colleagues and I will be watching all of the data carefully in the coming weeks and months and will adjust policy as needed to help ensure the U.S. economy continues to recover from the effects of COVID, and that we continue to make progress toward our economic goals. 1. These views are my own and do not represent any position of the Board of Governors or other Federal Reserve policymakers.Return to text 2. The Atlanta Fed's spider chart and the Kansas City Fed's measure of labor market conditions can be found on the Reserve Banks' respective websites athttps://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/labor-market-distributionsandhttps://www.kansascityfed.org/data-and-trends/labor-market-conditions-indicators.Return to text 3. The minutes of the September 2021 FOMC meeting are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2021 Community Bankers Symposium: Banking on the Future, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Good morning. I appreciate the opportunity to be part of this symposium on "Banking on the Future," especially since the future of banking is one of the highest priorities in my work at the Board. Today, I will focus my remarks on the importance of community banks to our financial system and the challenges they face. In particular, I will focus on the formation of new banks and pose two key questions concerning the recent scarcity of these "de novo" banks.1 The first question: Why have there been so few de novo bank formations over the last decade? And second, what can be done to encourage more de novo banks? I will begin with some background on community banks and bank formations. The Importance of Community BanksBy serving communities, households, and businesses that may be underserved by larger institutions, community banks play a key role in advancing diversification in the U.S. banking system. First and foremost, community banks provide critical financial services to their communities and to many customers who might have limited geographic access to banking services. Because community bankers are active participants and leaders in their communities, they typically know their customers and their needs better than a banker at a branch of a larger institution. Community banks draw upon this knowledge and conduct "relationship" lending versus relying on automated underwriting models that are typical in larger institutions. Therefore, community banks are more willing to underwrite loans to creditworthy customers based on an assessment of qualitative factors that automated models do not consider. Since community bankers are part of the fabric of their communities, they better understand the local market and economic conditions in the area compared to larger institutions that are not resident within the community. Collectively, community banks are critical in advancing the health and stability of the U.S. economy as evidenced by their participation in the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Community banks made 4.7 million PPP loans, totaling $429 billion, which accounted for nearly 60 percent of the program's total loan amount.2In comparison with the banking industry as a whole, these banks provided more loans to traditionally underserved communities and population segments: community banks provided 87 percent of total PPP loans to minority-owned businesses, 81 percent to women-owned businesses, and 69 percent to veteran-owned businesses.3 Trends in Community BankingDespite the local and national significance of community banks, their numbers, as well as the number of insured banks in general, have been declining for several years.4This erosion of community bank charters is not just an issue in our rural communities. In urban areas, these banks, including minority-owned banks, serve businesses and households that may also be overlooked by larger institutions. I am concerned that the contraction of community banks could lead to an unhealthy level of similarity in the banking system. As a result, this could limit the ability of households and small businesses to access credit and other types of financial products and services. The beauty of community banks is in their differences—whether in their personality or business model. Each is unique in its mission, service delivery, and profile. While I am troubled by the declining community bank footprint, I am not surprised that banks are choosing to merge or to be acquired. I am well aware of the significant challenges that smaller banks face. Since joining the Board, and increasingly over the past year, I have met with many state member bank CEOs who share these challenges with me. These CEOs have expressed frustrations with ever-increasing compliance burden, which distracts their attention from prudent revenue generating activities. As I discussed in recent remarks at the community bank research conference in late September, public policymakers must avoid adding regulatory burden on the smallest banks, particularly on those that maintain a more traditional business model.5Therefore, policymakers need to achieve a meaningful balance in our supervisory approach for community banks. Otherwise, community banks will continue to face a regulatory and supervisory framework that is ill-suited for a lower-risk profile and activities that are less complex than those of larger institutions. Why Have There Been So Few De Novo Bank Formations over the Last Decade?The underlying question remains: why have there been so few de novo bank formations over the last decade? There have been only a handful of new bank charter applications over the past decade. In fact, only 44 de novo banks have been established, which include both state and national charters. A 2014 study by Federal Reserve Board economists noted that from 1990 to 2008, over 2,000 new banks were formed, which on average is more than 100 per year.6In contrast, the study noted that only seven new banks were formed from 2009 to 2013. The 2014 Board study suggests that "low interest rates and depressed demand for banking services—both of which depress profit for banks, and particularly new banks—may also have discouraged entry."7 The conclusions from a Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City study completed this year align with observations from the 2014 Board study. In this more recent study, the authors noted that new bank formations tend to be cyclical, accelerating during periods of economic expansion and slowing during recessions.8While regulatory burden has also contributed to depressed de novo formations, the authors pointed to the weak economy following the 2007-2009 financial crisis and low profitability for banking as overriding factors. A recurring theme that has surfaced through my discussions with bankers and other industry stakeholders is the regulatory burden imposed upon de novo banks. In particular, community bankers noted the challenges in raising the capital required to establish a new bank. The 2014 Board study noted that the states' statutory capital requirements for a new state-chartered bank could be as low as $10 million, but in practice could be as high as $30 million.9Given the high initial capital requirement, a de novo bank has a small margin of error in implementing its business strategy and meeting profit projections. In establishing a new bank, bank executives explained the challenges in developing a business plan and risk-management framework that addresses how the bank can generate a sufficient profit to provide an adequate return to shareholders. For a de novo bank, the cost and burden of starting from ground zero in establishing their risk-management and internal controls are high. De novo banks make strategic decisions in establishing risk-management processes and controls that may delay the launch of revenue-generating products and services. Further, a de novo bank faces the pressure to grow quickly, which in turn, may lead to riskier lending and other activities. Indeed, experience has shown that pronounced problems often surface in the early years of a de novo bank's operations, which explains the elevated capital and supervisory expectations for these banks. The Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies generally expect a de novo bank to maintain a Tier 1 leverage ratio of at least 8 percent for the first three years of its existence and they examine the bank on a more frequent schedule.10 For a de novo bank, there is a heightened need to hire experienced staff who are quickly able to establish the bank and show progress in meeting the operating goals and profit projections in the business plan. As we all know, difficulty in finding skilled workers is an issue more broadly in the economy, but community bankers frequently tell me of their ongoing challenges in attracting and retaining experienced staff. These challenges are even more acute for de novo banks who require staff with experience in regulatory compliance and internal controls. A Kansas City Reserve Banks study echoes these anecdotes, which indicate that the volume and complexity of regulations require specialized expertise that can be costly and difficult to find.11 The competitive landscape for financial services and products is also a key consideration in developing and executing a de novo bank's business plan. I often hear the perspective from bankers that non-regulated financial entities have a competitive advantage over regulated financial institutions in providing financial services and products. It would be helpful to appropriately acknowledge this competitive disadvantage for banks and tailor the regulatory framework based on the risks and complexity of their activities. As a result, the economic, regulatory, and market realities discourage the formation of de novo banks, as investors have many other options for entry into the financial services market. For example, they may choose to acquire an existing bank charter and subsequently establish branches in new markets. Further, they can acquire a branch office from an existing bank. And finally, they may choose to establish or acquire a nonbank financial firm that is subject to less regulation than a chartered and insured financial institution. What Can Be Done to Encourage More De Novo Banks?So, let's address the second question: what can be done to encourage more de novo banks? Simply the fact that I am speaking about this topic today should give you the sense that I am concerned about the impact of the declining number of community banks. While the loss of a single community bank may be inconsequential to U.S. financial stability, that loss may have profound consequences to households and businesses in that community. This is particularly true in rural communities and remote areas and in certain urban areas when the loss of the local bank may leave customers in a banking desert, void of tangible, relationship-based financial services. But we should also be concerned about how a continued decline in the number of community banks, in part due to the lack of de novo formations, will affect the banking and financial services system more broadly. When banking services are limited, it is much more difficult for people to fully participate in the economy, or to manage their finances when times are tough. A shrinking community bank sector may lead to a weaker banking system and weaker economy. It is crucial to provide a balanced, transparent, and effective regulatory framework that promotes a vibrant community bank sector. Public policymakers need to ensure that the regulatory and supervisory framework promotes safety and soundness, while recognizing the reduced risk of these banks' noncomplex services and activities. As large institutions and nonregulated financial companies expand their reach into markets traditionally served by community banks, policymakers need to ensure that the regulatory and supervisory framework does not exacerbate this competitive disadvantage. If we are not able to achieve an appropriate balance, I am concerned that there will continue to be fewer de novo banks as well as a decline in the overall population of community banks. These banks are a key segment of the industry in that they provide financial services and products to a wide range of consumers and businesses. Looking to the future, policymakers need to appropriately refine the regulatory and supervisory framework to minimize unnecessary compliance costs for smaller banks and address impediments to bank formations. ClosingIn conclusion, I have raised two important questions about why there so few de novo banks and what can be done to encourage new bank formations. It is important for us to fully understand why we have seen the steady decline in bank formations, and to continue to explore ways to encourage community banks in such a competitive environment. Identifying answers to these questions should enable the federal banking agencies to identify potential regulatory and policy constraints on the formation of new banks. To further this effort, I have asked Federal Reserve staff to continue to study trends in community banking so that we can fully understand the economic and regulatory factors that constrain the ability of community banks to form, compete, and thrive. I appreciate the opportunity to raise these questions with you. And I look forward to further discussions about tailoring our regulatory and supervisory framework to ensure that community banks remain an essential part of the future of the U.S. financial system. 1. In general, an insured depository institution is in the de novo phase if it has been operating for three years or less.Return to text 2. See the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA), "Community Banks Made 60 Percent of PPP Loans to Small Businesses," news release, September 1, 2021.Return to text 3. ICBA, "Community Banks."Return to text 4. From 2011 to 2019, there has been a 30 percent decline in the number of community banks, whereas the number of larger banks has declined by more than 36 percent. See theFDIC Community Banking Study(December 2020) athttps://www.fdic.gov/resources/community-banking/report/2020/2020-cbi-study-full.pdf.Return to text 5. Michelle W. Bowman, "Creating a New Model for the Future of Supervision" (speech at the Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, September 28, 2021).Return to text 6. Robert M. Adams and Jacob P. Gramlich, "Where Are All the New Banks? The Role of Regulatory Burden in New Charter Creation (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-113 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2014 (revised July 2016)).Return to text 7. Adams and Gramlich, "Where Are All the New Banks?"Return to text 8. Matt Hanauer, Brent Lytle, Chris Summers, and Stephanie Ziadeh. "Community Banks' Ongoing Role in the U.S. Economy," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Economic Review106, no. 2 (June 24, 2021).Return to text 9. Adams and Gramlich, "Where Are All the New Banks?"Return to text 10. See Supervision and Regulation (SR) letter 20-16, "Supervision of De Novo State Member Banks," athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2016.htm. This guidance on the supervision of de novo banks aimed to promote transparency and timeliness in the supervision of these banks. Further, SR-20-16 aligned the Federal Reserve's definition of a de novo bank with that of the other agencies. All agencies now consider a bank to be in the de novo phase if it has been operating for three years or less.Return to text 11. Hanauer, Lytle, Summers, and Ziadeh. "Community Banks' Ongoing Role in the U.S. Economy."Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Dykhouse Scholar Program Speakers Series in Money, Banking, and Regulation South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota It has been a privilege to travel across and explore this beautiful state over the past several days and to be here in Brookings with you this evening. And I'm pleased to have the opportunity to share with you, the students of South Dakota State University (SDSU), my experience as a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and my outlook for the U.S. economy.1 Today I will speak to you about my outlook for the U.S. economy and what the Federal Reserve has been doing to support economic activity during the COVID-19 pandemic recovery. I will also touch on a few details about what I've learned of the economic conditions here in South Dakota. Over the past few days, I've had the opportunity to meet with a number of business and community leaders here in your state. Beginning on Monday in Rapid City, I made a quick pre-dawn visit to Mount Rushmore on Tuesday while en route to a Native American Indian reservation. Later in the day, I met with state, business, and tribal leaders in Pierre, and here in Brookings earlier today. Hearing directly about the successes and challenges from their perspective provides important context for understanding economic conditions that cannot be obtained from economic data. These conversations help us see through the data from the eyes of the people, businesses, and communities that make up the American economy. That information is very helpful to me and to us at the Federal Reserve as we make our policy decisions. But before I turn to the outlook and its implications for Federal Reserve decisions, let me share some basics about the Fed's responsibilities and how we carry out those responsibilities. As students of economics, you may already know that the Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy to support a strong and stable economy in the United States. Our official mandate from the Congress is to pursue two goals, maximum employment and stable prices. Together, we commonly refer to these objectives as our dual mandate, and pursuing both at the same time means that we seek the maximum level of employment that is consistent with price stability. Regarding the price-stability goal, our framework references an annual inflation rate of 2 percent as most consistent with our price-stability goal over the longer run. The Fed pursues its monetary policy goals using a variety of tools, but the main policy tool is the federal funds rate, a key interest rate for overnight borrowing by commercial banks that influences other interest rates throughout the economy. Lower interest rates tend to stimulate demand—for housing, cars and other durable goods, and business investment, for example—which boosts economic activity and has the potential to push up inflation. Higher interest rates tend to slow the economy and tend to push inflation down. In normal times, monetary policy decisions are made eight times each year through votes of members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).2In preparation for each meeting, the FOMC participants analyze the latest economic data and assess where the economy stands relative to our two mandated goals. And, because monetary policy decisions take some time to flow through to, or have their full effect on, the economy, FOMC participants must form a view about how they think the economy will evolve in the coming months and years. In addition to understanding where the economy is at any given point in time, making a judgment about where it is headed is also crucial to monetary policy. As I have learned in my nearly three years and almost 20 meetings as an FOMC member, economic forecasting is challenging, to say the least. Despite all of the data and economic models at our disposal, the economy is exceedingly complex, the product of countless decisions made every day by human beings, who have varied goals and motives. Economic data, sometimes received with a considerable time lag, can give us only a rough, backward-looking picture of the economy, and judging where the economy is headed in the future is even more difficult. Even the most accurate forecasts about the economy are often wrong, simply because of the uncertainty that is inherent in the task of interpreting and predicting future economic conditions. Yet our responsibility is to do just that—make predictions about how economic activity will evolve, and act on those forecasts in real time, to ensure that monetary policy can help support a strong economy. As part of this process, FOMC members also consider the different ways that our outlook may be wrong. We consider a number of alternative scenarios for the future and try to manage the relative risks of a policy decision if the future does not turn out as expected. I would compare that task with the judgments other professions might be required to make throughout the year. Since we are in South Dakota and farming is a familiar industry, let's use that as a comparison. Every farmer has an outlook for the costs of seed, fertilizer and other inputs, and the prices the crop might yield at the end of the growing season. Inherent in this outlook is considerable uncertainty, and a farmer has to be able to manage the risks and possible costs of being wrong in one way or another about prices. Decisions made before the growing or breeding season can have significant effects on profits after the crop is harvested or the livestock are sold. As with each member of the FOMC, this often involves careful decisions in the near term that can play out for months and years ahead. These are some of the challenges faced by members of the FOMC. Now let me tell you a bit about how I approach our monetary policy decisions. In preparation for each FOMC meeting, I regularly conduct extensive outreach to gather timely information from a broad range of industries and geographies. To me, it is important that economic discussion captures what is really going on in people's lives. With this in mind, I recently restarted theFed Listensprocess at the Board, in which we focus not on monetary policy and hear from a range of different people about how the economy is affecting them. As the member of the Board of Governors with experience in community banking, I often speak to local bankers, who are excellent sources to understand the important effects of monetary policy decisions on Main Street. With this perspective, and relying on my rural Kansas background, I also pay special attention to developments in rural communities and in the agriculture sector, monitoring the effect of Fed policy in those areas. For example, during my visit to South Dakota over the past few days, I have had the opportunity to tour parts of the Pine Ridge Reservation and discuss community development efforts and economic conditions with a number of tribal and community leaders. It is concerning to see that South Dakota's tribal communities, particularly those on rural reservations, are experiencing a slower employment recovery than in other parts of the country. I also heard firsthand about the challenges that some Native Americans, especially those living on reservations, face in accessing reliable financial services and finding affordable credit and housing. Understanding the barriers to financial inclusion is particularly important to ensuring that our financial system works for everyone. For this reason, I am pleased that the Federal Reserve recently joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion, an international network of central banks committed to engaging with Indigenous peoples and understanding and addressing their unique economic and financial challenges. I will serve as the Board's representative to this group and look forward to continuing our outreach and work in this area. As much as any other preparation for FOMC meetings, all of these conversations are vital inputs for my consideration of the data influencing my monetary policy decisions every six to eight weeks. To cite one example, in the early weeks of the pandemic, our outreach and communication with community bankers led the Fed to create a special lending program to help banks that were participating in the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which loaned and granted funding to small businesses. The Fed's PPP liquidity facility was crucial in ensuring that lenders had the liquidity they needed to get PPP funds out to businesses as quickly as possible, which resulted in the preservation of millions of jobs. Now that I've given you an idea of what this process looks like for me as a member of the FOMC, let me describe my view of current economic conditions, my outlook for the economy, and how I believe monetary policy can continue to support the recovery. Along the way, I will also highlight a few factors that I believe could pose a risk to continued progress toward our maximum-employment and inflation goals. First, looking at the job market, stringent economic and social distancing restrictions imposed in an effort to contain the spread of the virus resulted in enormous job losses in the early months of the pandemic, with the unemployment rate surging from 3.5 percent in February 2020 (a 50-year low) to 14.8 percent in April 2020. Since the middle of last year, however, as the economy started to reopen, we have seen steady progress toward maximum employment. That progress continued in September, with the unemployment rate moving down to 4.8 percent. Although the September increase in payrolls was smaller than many had expected, over the past three months we've seen an average of 550,000 jobs created, just down from the remarkable average pace of 567,000 per month in the first half of the year. At least part of the recent slowing in payroll growth seems to reflect a limited supply of labor. That's certainly what I've heard in South Dakota. Employers are having a very tough time filling jobs. I was told one ethanol plant needed to fill 15 jobs and got four applicants. In contrast, indicators of labor demand, such as unfilled job openings, remain exceptionally strong. On balance, I anticipate that employment will continue to move up in the months ahead, although for several reasons that are unrelated to the stance of monetary policy, I don't expect that we will see employment fully return to pre-pandemic levels any time soon. First, despite all of the economic progress, it is clear that switching off economic activity for such a long period has had lasting consequences, and expectations of a smooth resumption of production, transportation, and business operations may not be met for some time. Many workers that were initially laid off temporarily have left the workforce altogether, which is especially true for women, with nearly 2 million women leaving the workforce since the pandemic began. In addition, many older workers dislocated by the pandemic effectively retired and probably will not rejoin the workforce even in a much stronger job market. While I would not want to place too much weight on one or two months of data, the most recent reports on employment and anecdotal reports from a wide range of businesses suggest that, even when offering higher wages and signing bonuses, many employers are finding it difficult to fill open positions. History tells us that the longer workers remain out of the workforce, the less likely it is that they will return to employment and the greater the likelihood that they will lose skills and connections with the job market, which could weigh on labor force participation for years to come. The Federal Reserve's policy tools are useful for promoting a strong job market, but they are not well suited to addressing these harmful effects on labor supply. Another reason for my cautious outlook for employment growth is that, while large firms have adequate resources, funding options, and flexibility to withstand pandemic-related disruptions, many small businesses without those advantages have closed permanently. I continue to hear concern about the future from small business owners, which is also reflected in the latest readings from broader surveys of small business sentiment. While many factors lead to this perspective, I have heard specific reference to continued rising costs, supply chain issues, labor shortages, and uncertainty about other factors, like tax increases and vaccine mandates. Let me turn now to our other monetary policy goal, price stability. Earlier this year, as the economy was reopening, we saw a pronounced pickup in inflation, as prices for motor vehicles, electronics, and other goods rose especially rapidly. Most of these increases could be traced to bottlenecks in global supply chains. The bottlenecks were often the direct result of shortages of labor and key materials used in production and distribution. Demand for semiconductors has surged because of a sharp increase of spending on high-tech equipment and consumer electronics, investment in new wireless networks, and increasing usage of semiconductors in motor vehicles, appliances, and other goods. But throughout the pandemic, the supply of semiconductors has been significantly restrained by pandemic-related production disruptions, most recently in Malaysia and Vietnam. We are seeing shipments at record levels, and more capacity is expected to come on line, but the combination of strong demand and intermittent disruptions to this complex supply chain poses a risk that it could be some time before semiconductor supply issues are resolved. The motor vehicle industry is a prominent example of a downstream sector that has been adversely affected by the semiconductor supply crunch. Every new car and truck produced today has many semiconductors included in its electrical components. As a consequence, the shortage of automotive chips has considerably reduced the number of new cars completed in the manufacturing process, driving up prices for those that have been produced. The lack of new cars for sale on dealer lots has also boosted demand and prices this year for used cars and spilled over to the rental car market, leading to soaring car rental prices. Fortunately, these prices eased a bit in September, but they are still elevated, and this causes spillovers in the broader economy as well. When an auto assembly plant shuts down for several weeks and its workers are furloughed, a whole community and its businesses feel the ripple effects of that closure. For instance, when an auto assembly plant in Ohio was closed for several weeks last summer, we heard anecdotal reports of an outsized drop in bookings at a nearby hotel chain. The semiconductor shortage highlights the global nature of many supply chains, where a disruption in one link can have wide and unexpected effects across the globe and in many industries. As another example, beyond the motor vehicle industry, supply chain disruptions have also limited the availability of major appliances, which impairs the completion and delivery timeline for homebuilders and puts further pressure on the limited housing inventory. Supply chain problems can have surprising spillovers. In the past couple of days, I've heard that the pheasant-hunting season in South Dakota may be disrupted by a shortage of shotgun shells. Nationally, these effects have led some firms to consider shifting their manufacturing from overseas or sourcing inputs from suppliers closer to home in an effort to reduce supply chain risks. In the longer run, these efforts may lead to more resilient supply chains, but the short-term transition could introduce different vulnerabilities. I will be watching these developments closely. As the various supply bottlenecks we are currently seeing are gradually resolved, we should see monthly inflation readings step down further from the high rates we have observed this year. Nevertheless, I still see a material risk that supply-related pricing pressures could last longer than expected. Another source of inflation risk comes from the lower labor force participation, which, as I mentioned earlier, has led some firms to offer inducements to bring potential workers back, including hiring bonuses and higher wages. Even with these incentives, however, many firms are struggling with staffing, and some are also offering training programs for new hires to develop required job skills. Wage increases and these additional employee investments are increasing firms' costs, potentially adding to inflationary pressures. In the agricultural sector, prices for most major commodities remain above pre-pandemic levels, and farm income is expected to be higher than a year ago for the second consecutive year. But since farmers lock in prices for inputs before planting, the effects of substantial price increases for inputs like fuel and fertilizer have not yet been fully realized. In their planning for next season's planting, farmers are much more concerned about input cost inflation. Some estimates show that farmers could pay 30 to 70 percent more for fertilizer for the 2022 season. In addition, if they can even find equipment or land to buy, prices for these assets have continued to increase. Another source of inflationary pressure is the rapid increase in house prices, something that also raises potential concerns about valuation pressures. The ongoing strength in housing demand is also notably driving up rental costs. Higher house prices also make it much more difficult for low- to moderate-income households to become homeowners, as larger down payments and other financing requirements, in effect, lock these households out of the housing market. Amid the booming real estate market, some bankers I spoke with recently cited concerns about a possible house price bubble and growing concerns about potential risks to financial stability. These concerns are a notable change from our conversations a year ago, when most bankers were appreciating the frenzied activity in this market as a means to boost income in a very low-rate environment. Given the experience of the previous financial crisis, this development is something we should closely monitor. Now, unlike the conditions leading up to that crisis, homeowners have fewer financial obligations and debts, and many of the financial system vulnerabilities that existed have been addressed. But homes are a widely held asset, and even a modest shift in the housing market, especially a decline in home prices, could have significant ripple effects throughout the economy. If elevated inflation readings continue into and through the next year, we may begin to see an imprint on longer-run inflation expectations. While short-term inflation expectations have moved up with the recent period of increased inflation, longer-term measures have remained relatively stable. As we know, after reaching uncomfortably high levels in the 1970s and early 1980s, in more recent decades, inflation has run close to our 2 percent goal, helping anchor the public's inflation expectations at levels that seem consistent with our goal. This is relevant because the Fed has long considered the anchoring of inflation expectations an important condition for meeting our monetary policy goals. Finally, let's turn to the implications for monetary policy more broadly and the FOMC's most recent decision at our meeting in September. When actions taken to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 began to disrupt the U.S. economy and financial markets in the first half of last year, the FOMC cut short-term interest rates to near zero and began purchasing Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. These actions helped stabilize financial markets and sustain the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. By the middle of last year, we were seeing signs of resilience in economic activity, with labor market conditions beginning to recover from the economic effects of the pandemic. In December, we indicated that we would start scaling back our asset purchases after the U.S. economy had made "substantial further progress" toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.3We have been closely monitoring that progress since then, and, at our most recent policy meeting, we noted that, if the economy continues to improve as expected, this scaling back, or tapering of our asset purchases, may soon be warranted. I fully supported that assessment. Provided the economy continues to improve as I expect, I am very comfortable at this point with a decision to start to taper our asset purchases before the end of the year and, preferably, as early as at our next meeting in November. In my view, our asset purchases were an important part of our response to the economic effects of the pandemic, but they have essentially served their purpose. I am mindful that the remaining benefits to the economy from our asset purchases are now likely outweighed by the potential costs. In particular, I am concerned that our asset purchases could now be contributing to valuation pressures, especially in housing and equity markets, or that maintaining a highly accommodative monetary policy stance at this stage of the economic expansion may pose risks to the stability of longer-term inflation expectations. If the expansion continues as I expect, I will support a pace of tapering that would end our asset purchases by the middle of next year. In closing, I would say that our economy has made great strides this year, which is a testament to the resilience of U.S. households and businesses and the many challenges faced throughout the pandemic experience. While many risks to the outlook remain, I expect that the recovery will continue in the coming months, and that steady progress will be made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.Return to text 2. Except in very unusual circumstances, monetary policy decisions are made during our regular FOMC meetings eight times each year. The 12 Reserve Bank presidents and the members of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors participate in these meetings, with 5 of the 12 presidents and all of the Governors voting as members of the FOMC.Return to text 3. See the December 2020 FOMC statement (paragraph 4), which is available, along with other FOMC statements, on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the 2021 Institute of International Finance Annual Membership Meeting: Sustainable Economic Growth and Financial Stability in a Diverging, Decarbonizing, Digitizing, Indebted World, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the 2021 Institute of International Finance Annual Membership Meeting.1I regret that we are not meeting in person, but I look forward, as always, to a conversation with my good friend and one-time colleague Tim Adams. But first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook and Federal Reserve monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIndicators of economic activity and employment reveal that the economy continues to strengthen. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a strong 6.4 percent pace in the first half of the year, and growth is widely expected to continue at a robust, if perhaps somewhat slower, pace in the second half of the year. If so, GDP growth this calendar year could be the fastest since 1983. That said, the data also indicate that a surge in COVID-19 cases in the summer and supply-chain bottlenecks held back economic activity in the third quarter. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Job gains as measured by the payroll survey have averaged 550,000 per month over the past three months. Labor market progress this year, as measured by the Kansas City Fed's Labor Market Conditions Indicators, has been notable, with this index of 24 labor market indicators since December 2020 closing two-thirds of its shortfall relative to its pre-pandemic level.2Nonetheless, factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving obligations and ongoing fears of the virus, continue to weigh on employment and participation. Thus, the course of the labor market, and indeed that of the economy, continues to depend on the course of the virus. Since February 2020, core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) price inflation is running at a 2.9 percent annual pace that is well above what I would consider to be a moderate overshoot of our 2 percent longer-run goal for inflation. Fully reopening the $20 trillion economy this year is taking longer and costing more than it did to shut it down last year. In particular, the reopening has been characterized by significant sectoral shifts in both aggregate demand and supply, and these shifts are causing widespread bottlenecks and triggering substantial changes in the relative price and wage structure of the economy. A similar reopening dynamic is playing out in other advanced economies, such as Canada and the United Kingdom. As these relative price adjustments work their way through the economy, measured inflation rises. But I continue to believe that the underlying rate inflation in the U.S. economy is hovering close to our 2 percent longer-run objective and, thus, that the unwelcome surge in inflation this year, once these relative price adjustments are complete and bottlenecks have unclogged, will in the end prove to be largely transitory. And this is a forecast that is shared by the vast majority of economists in the private sector, such as those surveyed by Bloomberg and Blue Chip. That said, I believe, as do most of my colleagues, that the risks to inflation are to the upside, and I continue to be attuned and attentive to underlying inflation trends, in particular measures of inflation expectations, including the Board staff's index of common inflation expectations.3As Chair Powell has indicated, if we did see indicators of inflation expectations moving up and running persistently above levels consistent with our price stability mandate, monetary policy would react to that. But that is not the case at present. The September Decision and the Forward Guidance in Our FOMC StatementLet me now say a few words about the decisions reached at our September FOMC meeting. Since our December 2020 meeting, the Committee has indicated that it will continue to maintain the pace of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities purchases at $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until "substantial further progress" has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.4At our September meeting, the Committee continued to discuss the progress made toward these goals, and I myself believe that the "substantial further progress" standard has more than been met with regard to our price-stability mandate and has all but been met with regard to our employment mandate. If progress continues broadly as expected, the Committee in September judged that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. At our meeting, we also discussed the appropriate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic conditions satisfy the criterion laid out in the Committee's guidance. While no decisions were made, participants generally view that, so long as the recovery remains on track, a gradual tapering of our asset purchases that concludes around the middle of next year may soon be warranted. It is important to note that any future decision the Committee might make with regard to the pace of asset purchases will not be intended to carry a signal about the timing of a future decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, a policy decision for which we have articulated a different and substantially more stringent test. As we reaffirmed in September, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. At least half of the 18 FOMC participants in their Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) submissions projected that these necessary threshold conditions for liftoff will be met by December 2022, and all participants but 1 project that these conditions will be met by December 2023.5These projections are entirely consistent with the new monetary policy framework adopted unanimously by the Committee in August 2020.6In the context of our new framework, as I have noted before, while the effective lower bound (ELB) can be a constraint on monetary policy, the ELB is not a constraint on fiscal policy, and appropriate monetary policy under our new framework, to me, must—and certainly can—incorporate this reality. Indeed, under present circumstances, I judge that the support to aggregate demand from fiscal policy—including the nearly $2 trillion in accumulated excess savings accruing from (as yet) unspent transfer payments—in tandem with appropriate monetary policy, can fully offset the constraint, highlighted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, that the ELB imposes on the ability of an inflation-targeting monetary policy, acting on its own and in the absence of sufficient fiscal support, to restore, following a recession, maximum employment and price stability while keeping inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.7 Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Tim. ReferencesAhn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020)."Index of Common Inflation Expectations,"FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2. ——— (2021)."Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations,"FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5. Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). "When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 119 (February), pp. 78–121. Clarida, Richard H. (2020)."The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences,"speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16. ——— (2021)."The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance,"speech delivered at "SOMC: The Federal Reserve's New Policy Framework," a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York (via webcast), April 14. Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2011). "What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?" in Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual2010,vol. 25 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 59–112. Powell, Jerome H. (2020)."New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review,"speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27. Woodford, Michael (2011). "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol 3 (January), pp. 1–35. Woodford, Michael, and Yinxi Xie (2020)."Fiscal and Monetary Stabilization Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Consequences of Limited Foresight,"NBER Working Paper Series 27521. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The Labor Market Conditions Indicators can be found on the Kansas City Fed's website athttps://www.kansascityfed.org/data-and-trends/labor-market-conditions-indicators.Return to text 3. The Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—is a relevant indicator that this goal is being met. See Ahn and Fulton (2020, 2021).Return to text 4. FOMC statements, including those issued since the December 2020 meeting, are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 5. The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the September 2021 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 6. The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, unanimously approved on August 27, 2020, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review and a summary of the key changes that were introduced, see Clarida (2020, 2021) and Powell (2020).Return to text 7. For a theoretical analysis of the fiscal and monetary policy mix at the ELB, see Woodford and Xie (2020). For studies of the government expenditure multiplier at the ELB, see Woodford (2011); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); and Eggertsson (2011).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Women in Banking Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Richmond, Virginia (via webcast) Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be able to join you today for this conversation, and as a bank regulator and former banker, I am pleased that this conference is making the case for diversity in terms that everyone in business can understand. At any time, but especially now when attracting and keeping skilled and talented employees is so challenging, it only makes sense that you'll get the best employees if both menandwomen see a business with diverse leadership, and the opportunity to advance. And when a large share of your customers are women, when understanding their perspective is so important to your business, having women in leadership positions will help you serve these customers better and make you a more profitable and successful enterprise. In the year and a half since the pandemic began, life has changed in many ways, deeply impacting how we work and how we spend our time and money. The effects of these changes on the economy have been significant. So today, I would like to focus my discussion on how all of this has affected women in the labor market. Of course work has changed for nearly everyone in the labor force, but for women, the changes have arguably been greater during this time than any other since World War II. Back then, millions of women entered the workforce to step into roles historically reserved for men, and this time millions left the workforce to deal with school closures and other changes to home life caused by the pandemic. One question is how durable these changes may be. Therefore, today, I will also consider how these shifts may affect women's long-term financial prospects and will end with ideas about potential ways to make it easier for women to join or rejoin the workforce. Effects of the Pandemic on Women's EmploymentWhen considering the level of employment, I tend to focus on both the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate. Let's start with the unemployment rate. The economic and social distancing restrictions imposed at the onset of the pandemic resulted in enormous job losses, with the unemployment rate surging from 3.5 percent in February, which was a 50-year low, to 14.8 percent in April 2020. Women were affected more than men, which is a change from previous recessions, when men typically suffered greater job losses than women. In February 2020, the unemployment rate for women was slightly lower than for men, but by April it had risen to 16.1 percent, compared to 13.6 percent for men. That difference continued only until September, but this statistic does not reveal the fact that many women were leaving the workforce, and therefore not counted in unemployment. Their labor force participation fell more than the participation rate for men and at last count, there were two million fewer women in the labor force than before the pandemic.1The difference in employment for men and women held true across some minority groups.2 Reasons Why the Pandemic Affected Women DifferentlySo, what led to this decline in women's employment and what specific factors contributed to women's employment and their choice to leave the labor force? And why has this time been different than other points in our history, resulting in larger declines for women relative to men? In contrast to previous crises, COVID-19 had a larger impact on occupations with higher numbers of female workers. Women are disproportionately represented in high-contact jobs with less flexible work conditions, including lodging, food service, eldercare, and childcare, which were among the sectors most affected by the crisis. Most of these jobs cannot be performed from home or have less flexibility in the timing of when they can be performed. Roughly a quarter of women worked in these jobs, compared with around 10 percent of men.3This is one reason why female unemployment rose dramatically in comparison to male unemployment during the spring of 2020. Women's labor participation declined as the pandemic affected their ability to participate in the workforce. The lockdowns and layoffs in response to COVID disrupted daycare centers, schools, and other organized childcare, which continue in some areas even today. Traditional family supports, like extended family and grandparents, were also limited due to concerns about the virus and social distancing. Another factor was that caregiving responsibilities increased significantly during the pandemic, especially for women, including those who were participating in the workforce. Balancing work and family obligations has long been the reality for women. Studies have shown that women spend about twice as much time caring for and helping with children than men, and there is a significant disparity in many families where both men and women work. Even before the pandemic, most working mothers said they came home to a "second shift" of work. The pandemic served to amplify those family responsibilities, and I don't think it is surprising that as a result women dropped out of the workforce at a higher rate than explained by industry-mix and labor dynamics. Even more striking, the data show that while labor force exits increased for all women, they increased by more among women living with children under the age of six.4We saw more exits by single mothers and mothers with lower earnings at the beginning of the pandemic, perhaps because they were less able to find alternative childcare arrangements. Even now, as childcare centers have reopened, worker shortages and related cost increases are limiting the number of children who can be cared for at each facility. Higher childcare costs impact single and lower-income mothers disproportionately. Therefore, I see a risk that lack of childcare availability will continue to hold women back from participating in the labor force, which could be a drag on the economy. The final factor to consider is retirements. Many older workers who left the labor force are unlikely to return, and more of those workers were women. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that labor force participation among women 65 and older has fallen significantly more sharply than among men. Many additional workers over 55 dropped out of the labor force and over time will effectively retire. The loss of these workers will limit the productive capacity of the economy, and may make it harder, or even impossible in the near term, to return to the high level of employment achieved before the pandemic. Long-Term EffectsAs the economic expansion continues, the lingering effects of the pandemic could have long-lasting implications for women's job opportunities and in the longer term for their careers. As the job market strengthens, many women, particularly minority women, say they are considering returning to the labor force.5History tells us that the longer workers remain out of the workforce, the less likely it is that they will return to employment and the greater the likelihood that they will lose skills and connections with the job market, which could weigh on labor force participation and earnings for years to come. There are also effects that are difficult to quantify on the careers of parents who have to juggle even more responsibilities.6Employees who kept their jobs but reduced their hours or struggled to balance work and home life may find themselves in weaker positions for promotions, raises, and other advancement. These issues extend to women business owners. Compared to male business owners, women have reported worse financial health and have less confidence in the future of their businesses.7 Some longer-term factors affecting women's careers are hard to measure, and it may be some time before the full effects of the pandemic are clear. Even those who are working may face fewer opportunities to switch careers, or their employment and finances may be too tenuous to take time out to enhance their education or skills. What Can Help?While it's helpful to talk about the issues and their impact on women and employment, and I appreciate the opportunity to discuss them, it is also necessary to encourage research on potential solutions. What can we do to increase opportunities for women who must balance work and home, and what could help keep them from dropping out of the labor force? First, we should recognize the importance of caregiving for young children in the lives of working parents. Many of our Federal Reserve Banks are exploring how important early childhood education and care are for working families. Many are also conducting research on childhood education investments, challenges facing the childcare sector, and the longer-term benefits that childcare and education provide.8Of note, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond recently published a case study of the success of early childhood education in Danville, Virginia, which is part of the fifth District. In 2010, this rural community had few and fragmented early child care and educational services. Strong partnerships and investments in this area have created an early-childhood ecosystem, connecting providers, local services, and parent education classes.9I'd like to commend my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System who are adding to our base of knowledge through these types of initiatives. Finally, we need more research to understand the many ways that women's work opportunities and experiences are different from men. I'm happy to share that these are topics the Federal Reserve will continue to explore over the next few weeks. On October 21st, the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Kansas City will hold a seminar onUnderstanding and Empowering Women's Economic Participation,part of our ongoing community development research seminar series. And the Federal Reserve Board will also host a virtual conference onGender and the Economyon November 8th. Thank you again for inviting me to join you today, and I look forward to our discussion. 1. The statistics cover adults 20 years and older, with seasonal adjustments, and come from the current and historical tables A-1, A-2, and A-3 of the BLS Employment Situation report. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "The Employment Situation — September 2021," news release, October 8, 2021.Return to text 2. Labor force participation rates declined by 6.8 percent for Hispanic women and 4.2 percent for Black women between February 2020 and September 2021. Statistics come from current and historical tables A-1, A-2, and A-3 of the BLS Employment Situation report. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "The Employment Situation — September 2021."Return to text 3. Stefania Albanesi and Jiyeon Kim, "Effects of the COVID-19 Recession on the US Labor Market: Occupation, Family, and Gender,"Journal of Economic Perspectives35 (Summer 2021): 3–24.Return to text 4. Katherine Lim and Mike Zabek, "Women's Labor Force Exits during COVID-19: Differences by Motherhood, Race, and Ethnicity," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-067 (Washington: Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2021).Return to text 5. Lim and Zabek, "Women's Labor Force Exits."Return to text 6. Misty L. Heggeness, "Estimating the Immediate Impact of the COVID-19 Shock on Parental Attachment to the Labor Market and the Double Bind of Mothers,"Review of Economics of the Household18 (October 2020): 1053–1078, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11150-020-09514-x.Return to text 7. U.S. Chamber of Commerce,Special Report on Women-Owned Small Businesses During COVID-19(Washington: Chamber of Commerce, August 26, 2020), https://www.uschamber.com/report/special-report-women-owned-small-businesses-during-covid-19.Return to text 8. "Early Childhood Development," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis; "Investing in the Future of Child Care," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco; "Early Child Care for Working Parents," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.Return to text 9. Renee Haltom, "Rural Spotlight: Advancing Early Childhood Education in Danville-Pittsylvania," Rural Spotlight series (Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, October 7, 2021).Return to text