Five federal financial regulatory agencies announced today they will extend the comment period on the request for information on financial institutions' use of artificial intelligence (AI) until July 1, 2021. The agencies are seeking information from the public on how financial institutions use AI in their activities, including fraud prevention, personalization of customer services, credit underwriting, and other operations. More specifically, the RFI seeks comments to better understand the use of AI, including machine learning, by financial institutions; appropriate governance, risk management, and controls over AI; and challenges in developing, adopting, and managing AI. The agencies extended the comment period to allow stakeholders more time to coordinate and prepare their comments, which were originally due by June 1, 2021. Federal Registernotice: Request for Information and Comment on Financial Institutions’ Use of Artificial Intelligence, including Machine Learning
Federal bank regulatory agencies today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that are used to evaluate compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios replace the prior year's ratios from June 2020. By law, a bank is generally prohibited from establishing or acquiring branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of deposit production. Congress enacted section 109 to ensure that interstate branches would not take deposits from a community without the banks reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of that community. Additionally, branches of banks controlled by out-of-state bank holding companies are prohibited from operating primarily for the purpose of deposit production. The updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios are attached. Section 109 Host State Loan-to-Deposit Ratios (PDF)
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the "2021 Just Economy Conference" sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be with you today. Together, over the past year, we have been making our way through a very difficult time. We are not out of the woods yet, but I am glad to say that we are now making real progress. While some countries are still suffering terribly in the grip of COVID-19, the economic outlook here in the United States has clearly brightened. Vaccination levels are rising. Fiscal and monetary policy are providing strong support. The economy is reopening, bringing stronger economic activity and job creation. That is the high-level perspective—let's call it the 30,000 foot view—and from that vantage point, we see improvement. But we should also take a look at what is happening at street level. Lives and livelihoods have been affected in ways that vary from person to person, family to family, and community to community. The economic downturn has not fallen evenly on all Americans, and those least able to bear the burden have been the hardest hit. The pain is all the greater in light of the gains we had seen in the years prior to the pandemic. COVID swept in as the United States was experiencing the longest expansion on record. Unemployment was at 50-year lows, and inflation remained under control. Wages were moving up, particularly for the lowest-paid workers. Long-standing racial disparities in unemployment were narrowing, and many who had struggled for years were finding jobs. It was not until the later years of that expansion that its benefits had started to reach those on the margins. During ourFed Listensevents, we met with people around the country and heard repeatedly about the life-changing gains of the strong labor market, particularly at the lower end of the income spectrum. Just a few months later, those stories changed to ones of job losses, overextended support services, and businesses built over generations closing their doors for good. While the recovery is gathering strength, it has been slower for those in lower-paid jobs: Almost 20 percent of workers who were in the lowest earnings quartile in February of 2020 were not employed a year later, compared to 6 percent for workers in the highest quartile.1 The Fed's latest Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking—or SHED report—which will be published later this month, will show that, for prime-age adults without a bachelor's degree, 20 percent saw layoffs in 2020 versus 12 percent for college-educated workers. And more than 20 percent of Black and Hispanic prime-age workers were laid off compared to 14 percent of white workers over the same period. Small businesses have also faced immense difficulties. Fed research found that 80 percent of those surveyed reported a decline in revenue, with two-thirds of those businesses experiencing losses of at least 25 percent.2A recent Federal Reserve special report looked specifically at the impact on businesses owned by people of color, who reported greater challenges. For example, 67 percent of both Asian- and Black-owned firms and 63 percent of Hispanic-owned firms had to reduce their operations compared to 54 percent for their white counterparts.3 Our upcoming SHED report notes that 22 percent of parents were either not working or working less because of disruptions to childcare or in-person schooling. Black and Hispanic mothers—36 percent and 30 percent, respectively—were disproportionately affected. In a similar vein, labor force participation declined around 4 percentage points for Black and Hispanic women compared to 1.6 percentage points for white women and about 2 percentage points for men overall.4The Fed is focused on these long-standing disparities because they weigh on the productive capacity of our economy. We will only reach our full potential when everyone can contribute to, and share in, the benefits of prosperity. Achieving broadly shared prosperity will take action from across society, from fiscal and other government policy to private-sector initiatives to the work everyone here does. The Fed can contribute as well. Using our monetary policy tools, the Fed promotes maximum employment and price stability—two foundations of a strong, stable economy that can improve economic outcomes for all Americans. We view maximum employment as a broad and inclusive goal. Those who have historically been left behind stand the best chance of prospering in a strong economy with plentiful job opportunities. Our recent history highlights both the benefits of a strong economy and the severe costs of a weak one. Supervisory tools also have a role to play. As part of our policy responsibilities, the Board of Governors enforces both the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the federal fair lending laws that prohibit discrimination in lending. Violations of the fair lending laws, along with other illegal credit practices, are taken into account during bank evaluations under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). We see our robust supervisory approach as critical to addressing racial discrimination, which can limit consumers' ability to improve their economic circumstances, including through access to homeownership and education. The Fed's community development function plays a role as well, studying what works, convening stakeholders on both the national and District level, and helping financial institutions find opportunities to invest and expand credit opportunities in low- and moderate-income communities. The economic landscape has changed, and efforts to provide access and credit to communities must change with it. Last year, the Fed issued a proposal for a strengthened, modernized CRA framework, with the objective of building broad support among both external stakeholders and participating agencies. Our goal is to strengthen the core purpose of meeting the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities. We especially appreciated NCRC's feedback on the proposal. We will continue to do our part, and we appreciate the ways our work and that of NCRC members have intersected. Last April, for instance, the Fed expanded the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility in order to broaden its reach to include some nondepository lenders. That included CDFI (community development financial institution) loan funds, which many of the people here represent. Your work provided small businesses with invaluable technical assistance to help them weather the downturn, and you have helped them get the funds they need to support their businesses. NCRC member groups have contributed in so many ways. You helped workers who lost their jobs get retrained. You supported working parents. You helped homeowners struggling with payments and connected renters to federal assistance programs. You brought more people into the banking system, helped strengthen financial literacy and capabilities, and worked to address digital divides in areas of need—particularly in rural communities—at a time when connectivity is essential. I would like to close by saying thank you. You have been working hard through this crisis, and an enormous amount of work still lies ahead. But what you do is essential. You provide an invaluable service: You make people's lives better. There is no higher calling. Thank you. 1. The data pertain to Current Population Survey respondents who were in both the February 2020 and 2021 outgoing rotation groups. Earnings are weekly and were compared with all members of the outgoing rotation group in February 2020.Return to text 2. See the Federal Reserve Banks'Small Business Credit Survey: 2021 Report on Employer Firms(PDF)fielded in September–October 2020.Return to text 3. See the FRBs'Small Business Credit Surveyin note 2 as well asSmall Business Credit Survey: 2021 Report on Firms Owned by People of Color(PDF)released on April 15, 2021.Return to text 4. Data comparisons are for the period between February 2020 and March 2021.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Adyen, N.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands, to establish a federally-licensed branch in San Francisco, California. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by Huntington Bancshares Incorporated, Columbus, Ohio, to acquire TCF Financial Corporation, Detroit, Michigan, and thereby indirectly acquire TCF's subsidiary national bank, TCF National Bank, Sioux Falls, South Dakota. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the applications under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by (1) The PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to acquire BBVA USA Bancshares, Inc., Houston, Texas, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary state member bank, BBVA USA, Birmingham, Alabama, and (2) PNC Financial's subsidiary, PNC Bancorp, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, to acquire BBVA USA. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles Statement by Governor Brainard
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the third extension of a rule to bolster the effectiveness of the Small Business Administration's (SBA) Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Like the earlier extensions, this one will temporarily modify the Board's rules so that certain bank directors and shareholders can apply to their banks for PPP loans for their small businesses. To prevent favoritism, the Board limits the types and quantity of loans that bank directors, shareholders, officers, and businesses owned by these persons can receive from their affiliated banks. However, these limits have prevented some small business owners from accessing PPP loans—especially in rural areas. The SBA clarified last year that PPP lenders can make PPP loans to businesses owned by their directors and certain shareholders, subject to certain limits, and without favoritism. The Board's rule extension will allow those individuals to apply for PPP loans, consistent with SBA's rules and restrictions. The extension only applies to PPP loans. The Board is providing the rule extension for PPP loans made since March 31, and to allow banks to continue to make PPP loans to a broad range of small businesses within their communities. The SBA explicitly has prohibited banks from prioritizing or providing favorable processing time to PPP loan applications from a director or equity holder, and the Board will administer the rule extension accordingly. The rule extension, which is effective immediately, applies to PPP loans made from March 31 through June 30, 2021. The rule change will continue to apply if the PPP is extended, with the change ultimately sunsetting on March 31, 2022. Comments will be accepted for 45 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Loans to Executive Officers, Directors, and Principal Shareholders of Member Banks
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested public comment on proposed changes to its Policy on Payment System Risk (PSR policy) that governs the provision of intraday credit, or daylight overdrafts, to healthy depository institutions with accounts at the Federal Reserve Banks. The PSR policy establishes limits on the value of an institution's uncollateralized daylight overdrafts, which occur when a depository institution's Federal Reserve account is in a negative position during the business day. The Reserve Banks provide intraday balances by way of supplying temporary, intraday credit to healthy depository institutions in order to foster the smooth operation of the payment system. The PSR policy also allows institutions that might otherwise be constrained by those limits to request additional collateralized capacity. The proposal would modify the PSR policy to (1) expand access to collateralized capacity and (2) clarify the terms for accessing and retaining uncollateralized capacity. The proposal targets expanding options for higher levels of intraday credit capacity and does not propose any reductions of the current terms for providing uncollateralized access. Additionally, the Board proposes to modify the PSR policy and the Policy on Overnight Overdrafts to align them with the deployment of the FedNow℠ Service and its 24x7x365 payment environment. Comments on the proposed changes are requested within 60 days of publication in theFederal Register, which is expected shortly. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Potential Modifications to the Federal Reserve Policy on Payment System Risk to Expand Access to Collateralized Intraday Credit, Clarify Access to Uncollateralized Credit, and Support the Deployment of the FedNow Service (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday invited public comment on proposed changes to Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing) to clarify that debit card issuers should enable, and allow merchants to choose from, at least two unaffiliated networks for card-not-present debit card transactions, such as online purchases. The Board views these clarifications of Regulation II's existing requirements as necessary in light of information indicating that often only one network is enabled for such transactions. Additionally, the Board published today a biennial report containing summary information on debit card transactions in 2019. Regulation II implements section 920 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA). Among other things, the regulation requires that there be at least two unaffiliated payment card networks enabled on a debit card to process debit card transactions. At the time the Board promulgated Regulation II, the market had not developed solutions to broadly support multiple networks over which merchants could choose to route card-not-present transactions. Although technology has subsequently evolved to address these barriers, data collected by the Board and information from industry participants indicate that two unaffiliated networks are often not available to process card-not-present debit card transactions because some issuers do not enable two networks for those transactions. The absence of at least two unaffiliated networks for card-not-present transactions forecloses the ability of merchants to choose between competing networks when routing such transactions, an issue that has become increasingly pronounced because of continued growth in online transactions, particularly in the COVID-19 environment. The proposed revisions would clarify that card-not-present transactions are a "particular type of transaction" for which two unaffiliated payment card networks must be available. The proposed revisions would further clarify the responsibility of the debit card issuer in ensuring that at least two unaffiliated networks have in fact been enabled to comply with the regulation. The Board also published today a report on debit card transactions in 2019, including information on volume and value, interchange fee revenue, certain issuer costs, and fraud losses. The report is the sixth in a series published every two years as prescribed by section 920 of the EFTA and summarizes information collected from debit card issuers subject to the interchange fee standard in Regulation II and payment card networks. Key highlights are provided at the beginning of the report. The Board will continue to review the parts of Regulation II that directly address interchange fees for certain electronic debit transactions in light of the most recent data collected by the Board pursuant to section 920 of the EFTA and may propose revisions in the future. The Board'sFederal Registernotice and report are attached. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955 2019 Interchange Fee Revenue, Covered Issuer Costs, and Covered Issuer and Merchant Fraud Losses Related to Debit Card Transactions (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing Board Memo: Proposed Amendments to Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing) to Clarify the Prohibition on Network Exclusivity; Biennial Report on 2019 Interchange Fee Revenue, Covered Issuer Costs, and Covered Issuer and Merchant Fraud Losses Related to Debit Card Transactions (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday invited public comment on proposed guidelines to evaluate requests for accounts and payment services at Federal Reserve Banks ("Account Access Guidelines"). Recent years have seen the introduction of new financial products and delivery mechanisms for traditional banking services, notably leveraging emerging technologies, including from institutions with novel types of banking charters designed to support such innovation. To facilitate these activities, some such institutions have requested access to the payments system offered by Federal Reserve Banks. To help achieve the goal of applying a transparent and consistent process for all access requests, as well as considering the ramifications for the broader financial system, the Board is proposing Account Access Guidelines for the Reserve Banks to evaluate such requests. These guidelines take into account the Board's legal authority and reflect an analysis of its policy goals. "With technology driving rapid change in the payments landscape, the proposed Account Access Guidelines would ensure requests for access to the Federal Reserve payments system from novel institutions are evaluated in a consistent and transparent manner that promotes a safe, efficient, inclusive, and innovative payment system, consumer protection, and the safety and soundness of the banking system," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Lael Brainard. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice:Proposed Guidelines for Evaluating Account and Services Requests (PDF) Board Memo: Proposed guidelines to evaluate requests for accounts and services at Federal Reserve Banks (PDF)
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. In the fourth quarter of 2020, nearly one-fourth of adults said that they were worse off financially compared to a year earlier, reflecting the economic fallout and distress resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic. The Federal Reserve Board's report,Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2020,which was released on Monday, found a larger share of adults were worse off in 2020 than in previous years of the survey. This change occurred broadly across the population, but not all groups fared similarly. Despite the increase in the share of Americans doing worse off financially, most believed they were still at least doing "okay" financially overall. Seventy-five percent of adults were either doing okay or living comfortably in November, which was unchanged from 2019 after having fluctuated through the year. However, not all groups have fared similarly through the pandemic, and persistent disparities in well-being across education and race remained. Adults with at least a bachelor's degree were much more likely to report doing at least okay financially (89 percent) than those with less than a high school degree (45 percent). This gap increased to 44 percentage points in 2020 from 34 percentage points in 2019. In 2020, less than two-thirds of Black and Hispanic adults were doing at least okay financially, compared with 80 percent of White adults and 84 percent of Asian adults. The gap in financial well-being between White adults and Black and Hispanic adults has grown by 4 percentage points since 2017. The report draws from the Board's eighth annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which examines the economic well-being and financial lives of U.S. adults and their families. The 2020 survey of over 11,000 adults was conducted in November of last year, offering a picture of how individuals were faring eight months after the onset of the pandemic. This year's report covers emerging issues brought on by pandemic-related disruptions and offers insights into how people viewed their longer-run financial circumstances, including how they relate to education, housing satisfaction, and retirement savings. "This new survey gives us valuable details about the financial challenges families have faced during the pandemic," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Michelle W. Bowman. "Even as the economy has improved, we can certainly see that some are still struggling, especially those who lost their jobs and those with less education, many of whom fell further behind. Helping families and communities was a central goal of the Federal Reserve's response to the pandemic, and the SHED is providing valuable insight into the successes and ongoing challenges of Americans as they continue to experience its effects." People who retained their jobs during the pandemic generally had stable or improving finances in 2020. However, those who suffered a layoff and an extended period of unemployment saw a deterioration of their financial circumstances. Layoffs during the pandemic were concentrated among workers with fewer financial resources, which further exacerbated pre-existing disparities in their financial well-being. Those who were laid off during the pandemic typically had a relatively small financial cushion to begin with, as less than two-thirds of those who were laid off said they were doing at least okay financially in late 2019, before experiencing job loss. The survey confirmed that the ability of parents to work was affected by disruptions in childcare and schooling. Twenty-two percent of all parents were either not working (9 percent) or were working less (13 percent) because of such disruptions. The 9 percent of parents who were not working translates into nearly 2 percentage points fewer adults who were working overall. The unexpected pandemic-related need for childcare particularly affected mothers, preventing them from entering or fully participating in the labor force. Black, Hispanic, and single mothers, as well as mothers with low incomes, were more likely not to be working or to be working less due to the disruption. Students of all ages were also affected by the pandemic since widespread school closures began in March 2020. Parents viewed online education less favorably than in-person education. Only 22 percent of parents of K-12 students taking online classes thought their youngest child was learning as much as they were with in-person classes, whereas 59 percent said they were not. Among college students taking classes online, 34 percent thought they were learning as much as they would in-person, compared with 43 percent who did not. Results from the survey reflect financial conditions in late 2020 during the pandemic and indicate the changing nature of families' experiences. Financial repercussions related to COVID-19 continue to evolve, and the Federal Reserve Board will continue to monitor them. The report, downloadable data, data visualizations, and a video summarizing the survey's findings may be found at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Interactive Charts
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between March 19, 2021, and April 2, 2021, and includes responses from banks that held approximately three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The March 2021 survey is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Technological advances are driving rapid change in the global payments landscape. The Federal Reserve is studying these developments and exploring ways that it might refine its role as a core payment services provider and as the issuing authority for U.S. currency. "As the central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve is charged with promoting monetary and financial stability and the safety and efficiency of the payment system," Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell said Thursday in a video message. "In pursuit of these core functions we have been carefully monitoring and adapting to the technological innovations now transforming the world of payments, finance, and banking." This technology also offers new possibilities to central banks—including the Fed. In particular, it enables the development and issuance of central bank digital currencies, or CBDCs. A CBDC is a new type of central bank liability issued in digital form. While various structures and technologies might be used, a CBDC could be designed for use by the general public. As the Federal Reserve explores the potential benefits and risks of CBDCs, the key focus is on whether and how a CBDC could improve on an already safe, effective, dynamic, and efficient U.S. domestic payments system in its ability to serve the needs of households and businesses. "We think it is important that any potential CBDC could serve as a complement to, and not a replacement of, cash and current private-sector digital forms of the dollar, such as deposits at commercial banks," Powell said. "The design of a CBDC would raise important monetary policy, financial stability, consumer protection, legal, and privacy considerations and will require careful thought and analysis—including input from the public and elected officials." Powell announced that the Federal Reserve plans to publish this summer a discussion paper that will explore the implications of fast-evolving technology for digital payments, with a particular focus on the possibility of issuing a U.S. central bank digital currency. The paper will complement Federal Reserve System research that is already underway. The Federal Reserve System is focused on better understanding the full set of opportunities and risks associated with new digital payment mechanisms. More technically oriented projects, focused on specific tools and infrastructure, are underway at the Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The Fed is also collaborating internationally in groups such as the Bank for International Settlements' CBDC coalition. A video message from Chair Powell on payment innovation can be viewed at:www.federalreserve.gov. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from April 5 through April 28, 2021. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on April 27–28, 2021. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 27–28, 2021:HTML|PDF
Governor Lael Brainard At "The Road to Recovery and What's Next," a virtual conference sponsored by the Society for Advancing Business Editing and Writing (via webcast) I want to thank Heather Long and the Society for Advancing Business Editing and Writing for inviting me to join you today.1 Strong fiscal support and increasing vaccination rates drove a strong rebound in activity in the first quarter, and the second quarter looks to be even stronger. The outlook is bright, but uncertainty remains, and employment and inflation are far from our goals. While more balanced than earlier this year, risks remain from vaccine hesitancy, deadlier variants, and a resurgence of cases in some foreign countries. The latest jobs report is a reminder that the path of reopening and recovery—like the shutdown—is likely to be uneven and difficult to predict, so basing monetary policy on outcomes rather than the outlook will serve us well. With the renewal of fiscal support, real disposable personal income surged 61 percent on an annualized basis in the first quarter after a decline of 10 percent in the fourth quarter. Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) jumped 10.7 percent, supporting a robust 6.4 percent growth rate in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the first quarter, despite a large runoff of inventories amid supply chain bottlenecks. The second quarter appears primed to exceed the strong first quarter as progress on vaccinations continues, and more consumers return to the sectors adversely affected by COVID-19.2The combination of fiscal support and depressed discretionary services spending during the shutdown have enabled households to accumulate considerable savings that could continue to fuel spending. Personal savings rose to 21 percent in the first quarter, according to Bureau of Economic Analysis data, on top of the $2.1 trillion increase in household liquid assets reflected at the end of last year.3 While the incoming spending data, elevated household savings, and progress on vaccinations point to a very strong modal outlook, there is greater than usual uncertainty about the economy's path. For instance, the strength of domestic demand this year relative to next will depend on how quickly or slowly a large share of accumulated household savings is spent out. This, in turn, hinges in part on the distribution of household savings and how much is concentrated among households who are less likely to spend, perhaps because their services consumption returns only to pre-COVID levels or their near-term demand for durable goods has largely been satiated.4 There is also uncertainty about how much of the strong domestic aggregate demand will leak abroad rather than translating into domestic output. As supply chain and shipping bottlenecks ease, international spillovers could lead to some slippage between the increase in domestic demand and domestic resource utilization. In addition, some of this year's tailwinds are likely to become next year's headwinds. While the fiscal support provided to households is raising consumer spending and GDP this year, the absence of similar transfers will lower the growth rate of spending next year relative to this year. The boost to spending from pent up demand this year as the economy reopens is also unlikely to be repeated next year. The latest jobs report reminds us that while there are good reasons to expect the number of jobs and the number of people wanting to work will make a full recovery, it is unlikely they will recover at the same pace. Over the past few months, the demand for workers has strengthened as COVID-affected sectors have reopened. Labor supply has also improved, with many people coming back into the labor force and others extending their hours of work, but there are indications that many other workers still face virus-related impediments. Although the fraction of the population ages 25 to 54 that is employed has improved in each month of this year, the current prime-age employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio of 76.9 percent is still far from the 80 percent level reached during both of the past two expansions.5 On the demand side, we saw a welcome increase of 331,000 jobs in the hard-hit leisure and hospitality sector in April following a 206,000 increase in March. But bottlenecks on inputs such as semiconductors appear to be limiting production and hiring in industries such as motor vehicles, contributing to a decline of 18,000 jobs in the manufacturing sector. The increase in average hours worked and the reduction in people who are working part time but would prefer full-time work suggest some employers are responding to the increase in demand by lengthening workweeks. On the supply side, the number of people entering the labor force strengthened for the second month in a row in a welcome sign that more people are actively seeking work as job opportunities and vaccinations increase. But we are also hearing anecdotal accounts that many people face virus-related impediments in returning to full-time work, and many businesses face hiring challenges. With less than one-in-four individuals ages 18 to 64 fully vaccinated at the end of the survey period for the April jobs report, health and safety concerns remain important for in-person work and for people relying on public transport, and childcare remains a challenge for many parents.6 Childcare remains an impediment for many parents because the return to fully in-person school is still incomplete and childcare options are still limited in many areas.7At the time of the April jobs report, nearly two-thirds of students had yet to return to fully in-person schooling, and this share had only increased by 8 percentage points since March.8Consistent with this, the labor force participation rate of women ages 25 to 45 was unchanged in April, after an increase in March that coincided with a surge in education hiring and school reopening. Similarly, April saw a small increase in the number of women who reported that they wanted a job but were out of the labor force for family responsibilities, following a large decline in March.9Recent research shows that the pandemic has taken a particularly significant toll on the labor market status of many Black and Hispanic mothers and mothers with lower incomes.10 Aggregate average hourly earnings increased by 0.7 percent in April in a positive development for workers. Wage increases were broadly distributed across sectors, including an increase of more than 1-1/2 percent, month over month, in hourly earnings in the leisure and hospitality sector. While labor market conditions have improved in aggregate, significant disparities persist. Although the prime-age EPOP ratio has increased for all racial groups over the past four months, the ratio for Black prime-age workers, at 72.1 percent, is still over 6 percentage points lower than the white prime-age EPOP ratio, while the gap for Hispanic prime-age workers relative to white workers is almost 5 percentage points. Job losses are disproportionately concentrated in low-wage, high-contact sectors, suggesting that the workers least able to shoulder the economic effect of job loss have faced the greatest challenges. Despite the more than 900,000 jobs gained in the leisure and hospitality sector in the first four months of 2021, jobs in this sector remain nearly 3 million below their pre-COVID level. The leisure and hospitality sector alone accounts for 41 percent of the net loss in private payrolls since the onset of the pandemic. There is good reason to expect a strong rebound in employment over coming quarters, although the different forces affecting demand and supply may lead to uneven rates of progress. But today, by any measure, employment remains far from our goals. The unemployment rate remains elevated at 8.9 percent when we adjust the narrow 6.1 percent U-3 measure of unemployment to also reflect workers who have left the labor force since the pandemic started and those who are misclassified. As of the latest reading, there is an employment shortfall of 8.2 million relative to the pre-pandemic level, and the employment shortfall is over 10 million if we take into account the secular job growth that would have occurred over the period since February 2020 in normal circumstances.11 The path of inflation is also difficult to predict, although there are a variety of reasons to expect an increase in inflation associated with reopening that is largely transitory. Most immediately, base effects are likely to contribute substantially to the 12-month readings of headline and core PCE inflation in April and May as the price declines of March and April 2020 roll out of the 12-month calculation. I also anticipate that the recent surge in energy prices, which contributed about 1/2 percentage point to the March 12-month headline PCE reading, will fade over time, although recent pipeline disruptions add some uncertainty. It is much more difficult to predict the size and duration of supply-side bottlenecks and how these will interact with the pattern of demand to feed through into inflation. The production of certain semiconductors may take some time to ramp up, and the feedback effects between shipping delays and container shortages appear to be only slowly working themselves out. In contrast, the manufacturing capacity taken offline by the harsh weather in Texas in February is coming back online rapidly. If past experience is any guide, production will rise to meet the level of goods demand before too long. The supply–demand imbalances in the in-person services sector are expected to be resolved within a few quarters with progress on virus control and the return of in-person schooling. And demand growth itself is expected to moderate after a reopening surge, broadly coinciding with the time when some of the current tailwinds from fiscal support and makeup consumption turn to headwinds. Of course, there may be additional demand and supply surprises that could further complicate the inflation picture. To the extent that supply chain congestion and other reopening frictions are transitory, they are unlikely to generate persistently higher inflation on their own. A persistent material increase in inflation would require not just that wages or prices increase for a period after reopening, but also a broad expectation that they will continue to increase at a persistently higher pace. A limited period of pandemic-related price increases is unlikely to durably change inflation dynamics. Past experience suggests many businesses are likely to compress margins and to rely on automation to reduce costs rather than fully passing on price increases.12In the December Duke CFO Survey, roughly one-half of chief financial officers from large firms and about one-third of those from small firms reported "using, or planning to use, automation or technology to reduce reliance on labor."13The pandemic-induced shift to virtual, or contactless, versions of many previously in-person interactions is likely to lead to some durable shifts in the use of technology. Thus, there are compelling reasons to expect the well-entrenched inflation dynamics that prevailed for a quarter-century to reassert themselves next year as imbalances associated with reopening are resolved, work and consumption patterns settle into a post-pandemic "new normal," and some of the current tailwinds shift to headwinds.14 I will be carefully monitoring measures of longer-term inflation expectations to ensure they are well anchored at 2 percent. To date, various measures suggest inflation expectations remain well anchored and broadly consistent with our new framework. The Index of Common Inflation Expectations moved back to 2 percent in the first quarter, returning to its level in 2018, which is lower than its level prior to 2014.15In addition, the term structure of market-based measures of inflation compensation is consistent with market participants expecting a limited period of inflation above 2 percent. A straight read of the difference between the forward nominal Treasury curve and the forward Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities curve implies inflation compensation is expected to be higher for the next two years and to decline subsequently and remain stable 5 and 10 years into the future. I will remain attentive to the risk that what seem like transitory inflationary pressures could prove persistent as I closely monitor the incoming data. Should this risk manifest, we have the tools and the experience to gently guide inflation back to our target. No one should doubt our commitment to do so. But recent experience suggests we should not lightly dismiss the risk on the other side. Achieving our inflation goal requires firmly anchoring inflation expectations at 2 percent. Following the reopening, there will need to be strong underlying momentum to reach the outcomes in our forward guidance. Remaining patient through the transitory surge associated with reopening will help ensure that the underlying economic momentum that will be needed to reach our goals as some current tailwinds shift to headwinds is not curtailed by a premature tightening of financial conditions. The outlook is bright, but risks remain, and we are far from our goals. The latest employment report reminds us that realized outcomes can diverge from forward projections and underscores the value of patience. As the economy reopens fully and the recovery gathers momentum, it will be important to remain patiently focused on achieving the maximum-employment and inflation outcomes in our guidance. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve for his assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. While the seven-day moving average of daily vaccine doses administered has declined from its mid-April peak, over half of the adult population has now been given at least one dose of the vaccine, and around 2 million doses were administered each day of the week ending May 5, the most recent available data. For more information, see the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) COVID Data Tracker, which is available athttps://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker.Return to text 3. According to the Financial Accounts of the United States, liquid assets—defined as the sum of currency; checkable, time, and saving deposits; and money market funds—increased about $2.1 trillion from 2020:Q1 to 2020:Q4. The 2020:Q4 release of the Financial Accounts of the United States is available on theBoard's website.Return to text 4. See, for example, the difference in high-frequency indicators of consumer spending between measures of total spending and spending in low-income Zip codes in the weeks following the payment of stimulus under the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021. Data are available from Opportunity Insights athttps://www.tracktherecovery.org. For further discussion of differing spend-out of COVID stimulus payments for different levels of household wealth, see, for example, Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan (2020), "Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from COVID-19 Stimulus Payments," Working Paper Series 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May; revised February 2021).Return to text 5. For additional discussion, see Lael Brainard (2021), "How Should We Think about Full Employment in the Federal Reserve's Dual Mandate?" speech delivered at the Ec10, Principles of Economics, Lecture, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (via webcast), February 24.Return to text 6. The share of people ages 18 to 64 years old who are fully vaccinated is calculated using the percent of people fully vaccinated on April 17 by age group according to the CDC's COVID Data Tracker, available athttps://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker, and then weighting each age group based on the U.S. Census Bureau's 2019 population estimates, available athttps://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest/technical-documentation/file-layouts/2010-2019/nc-est2019-agesex-res.csv, for the corresponding age group.Return to text 7. See the Return to Learn Tracker, a collaboration of the American Enterprise Institute and the College Crisis Initiative of Davidson College:https://www.returntolearntracker.net. See also Lauren Bauer (2021), "Mothers Are Being Left behind in the Economic Recovery from COVID-19," Brookings Institution,Up Front(blog), May 6.Return to text 8. The share of students who have yet to return to fully in-person learning is calculated using school districts' operating statuses from the AEI's Return to Learn Tracker (as of the weeks starting March 8, 2021, and April 12, 2021), where each school district is weighted based on the number of students enrolled in 2019 according to the National Center for Education Statistics. Seehttps://www.returntolearntracker.net.Return to text 9. The BLS reported that the number of women who wanted a job, searched for work in the previous year (but not in the past four weeks), were available for work, and cited family responsibilities as the primary reason they were out of the labor force fell from 115,000 in February to 69,000 in March and then edged higher to 71,000 in April.Return to text 10. Research indicates that participation for mothers in households with an annual income below $50,000 per year declined nearly 9 percent relative to pre-pandemic levels, while participation for mothers in households with incomes above $100,000 fell a little under 2 percent. For more information, see Olivia Lofton, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lily Seitelman (2021), "Parents in a Pandemic Labor Market," Working Paper Series 2021-04 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February).Return to text 11. For example, during 2019, after the recovery had matured and the unemployment rate had reached 4 percent, total nonfarm payrolls increased by an average of 168,000 workers per month, or roughly 2 million workers per year.Return to text 12. Regarding compression of margins and pass-through of wage increases to prices, see Ekaterina V. Peneva and Jeremy B. Rudd (2017), "The Passthrough of Labor Costs to Price Inflation,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 49 (December), pp. 1777–802; and the subsequent analysis in Ekaterina Peneva (2019), "It's All about the Labor Market (PDF)," presentation delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, October 3.Return to text 13. Details on the CFO Survey, which is a partnership of Duke University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, can be found on the Richmond Fed's website athttps://www.richmondfed.org/research/national_economy/cfo_survey.Return to text 14. Statistical models estimate that underlying core PCE inflation ranges from 0.1 to 0.4 percentage point below the 2 percent longer-run target. See the point estimates for 2019:Q2 in table 1 in Jeremy B. Rudd (2020), "Underlying Inflation: Its Measurement and Significance," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18).Return to text 15. See Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020), "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2).Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the Consensus by CoinDesk 2021 Conference, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Technology is driving dramatic change in the U.S. payments system, which is a vital infrastructure that touches everyone.1The pandemic accelerated the migration to contactless transactions and highlighted the importance of access to safe, timely, and low-cost payments for all. With technology platforms introducing digital private money into the U.S. payments system, and foreign authorities exploring the potential for central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) in cross-border payments, the Federal Reserve is stepping up its research and public engagement on CBDCs. As Chair Powell discussed last week, an important early step on public engagement is a plan to publish a discussion paper this summer to lay out the Federal Reserve Board's current thinking on digital payments, with a particular focus on the benefits and risks associated with CBDC in the U.S. context.2 Sharpening the Focus on CBDCsFour developments—the growing role of digital private money, the migration to digital payments, plans for the use of foreign CBDCs in cross-border payments, and concerns about financial exclusion—are sharpening the focus on CBDCs. First, some technology platforms are developing stablecoins for use in payments networks.3A stablecoin is a type of digital asset whose value is tied in some way to traditional stores of value, such as government-issued, or fiat, currencies or gold. Stablecoins vary widely in the assets they are linked to, the ability of users to redeem the stablecoin claims for the reference assets, whether they allow unhosted wallets, and the extent to which a central issuer is liable for making good on redemption rights. Unlike central bank fiat currencies, stablecoins do not have legal tender status. Depending on underlying arrangements, some may expose consumers and businesses to risk. If widely adopted, stablecoins could serve as the basis of an alternative payments system oriented around new private forms of money. Given the network externalities associated with achieving scale in payments, there is a risk that the widespread use of private monies for consumer payments could fragment parts of the U.S. payment system in ways that impose burdens and raise costs for households and businesses. A predominance of private monies may introduce consumer protection and financial stability risks because of their potential volatility and the risk of run-like behavior. Indeed, the period in the nineteenth century when there was active competition among issuers of private paper banknotes in the United States is now notorious for inefficiency, fraud, and instability in the payments system.4It led to the need for a uniform form of money backed by the national government. Second, the pandemic accelerated the migration to digital payments. Even before the pandemic, some countries, like Sweden, were seeing a pronounced migration from cash to digital payments.5To the extent that digital payments crowd out the use of cash, this raises questions about how to ensure that consumers retain access to a form of safe central bank money. In the United States, the pandemic led to an acceleration of the migration to digital payments as well as increased demand for cash. While the use of cash spiked at certain times, there was a pronounced shift by consumers and businesses to contactless transactions facilitated by electronic payments.6The Federal Reserve remains committed to ensuring that the public has access to safe, reliable, and secure means of payment, including cash. As part of this commitment, we must explore—and try to anticipate—the extent to which households' and businesses' needs and preferences may migrate further to digital payments over time. Third, some foreign countries have chosen to develop and, in some cases, deploy their own CBDC. Although each country will decide whether to issue a CBDC based on its unique domestic conditions, the issuance of a CBDC in one jurisdiction, along with its prominent use in cross-border payments, could have significant effects across the globe. Given the potential for CBDCs to gain prominence in cross-border payments and the reserve currency role of the dollar, it is vital for the United States to be at the table in the development of cross-border standards. Finally, the pandemic underscored the importance of access to timely, safe, efficient, and affordable payments for all Americans and the high cost associated with being unbanked and underbanked. While the large majority of pandemic relief payments moved quickly via direct deposits to bank accounts, it took weeks to distribute relief payments in the form of prepaid debit cards and checks to households who did not have up-to-date bank account information with the Internal Revenue Service. The challenges of getting relief payments to these households highlighted the benefits of delivering payments more quickly, cheaply, and seamlessly through digital means. Policy ConsiderationsIn any assessment of a CBDC, it is important to be clear about what benefits a CBDC would offer over and above current and emerging payments options, what costs and risks a CBDC might entail, and how it might affect broader policy objectives. I will briefly discuss several of the most prominent considerations. Preserve general access to safe central bank moneyCentral bank money is important for payment systems because it represents a safe settlement asset, allowing users to exchange central bank liabilities without concern about liquidity and credit risk. Consumers and businesses don't generally consider whether the money they are using is a liability of the central bank, as with cash, or of a commercial bank, as with bank deposits. This is largely because the two are seamlessly interchangeable for most purposes owing to the provision of federal deposit insurance and banking supervision, which provide protection for consumers and businesses alike. It is not obvious that new forms of private money that reference fiat currency, like stablecoins, can carry the same level of protection as bank deposits or fiat currency. Although various federal and state laws establish protections for users, nonbank issuers of private money are not regulated to the same extent as banks, the value stored in these systems is not insured directly by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and consumers may be at risk that the issuer will not be able to honor its liabilities. New forms of private money may introduce counterparty risk into the payments system in new ways that could lead to consumer protection threats or, at large scale, broader financial stability risks. In contrast, a digital dollar would be a new type of central bank money issued in digital form for use by the general public. By introducing safe central bank money that is accessible to households and businesses in digital payments systems, a CBDC would reduce counterparty risk and the associated consumer protection and financial stability risks. Improve efficiencyOne expected benefit is that a CBDC would reduce or even eliminate operational and financial inefficiencies, or other frictions, in payments, clearing, and settlement. Today, the speed by which consumers and businesses can access the funds following a payment can vary significantly, up to a few days when relying on certain instruments, such as a check, to a few seconds in a real-time payments system. Advances in technology, including the use of distributed ledgers and smart contracts, may have the potential to fundamentally change the way in which payment activities are conducted and the roles of financial intermediaries and infrastructures. The introduction of a CBDC may provide an important foundation for beneficial innovation and competition in retail payments in the United States. Most immediately, we are taking a critical step to build a strong foundation with the introduction of the FedNowSMService, a new instant payments infrastructure that is scheduled to go into production in two years. The FedNow Service will enable banks of every size and in every community across America to provide safe and efficient instant payment services around the clock, every day of the year. Through the banks using the service, consumers and businesses will be able to send and receive payments conveniently, such as on a mobile device, and recipients will have full access to funds immediately. Promote competition and diversity and lower transactions costsToday, the costs of certain retail payments transactions are high and not always transparent to end users.7Competition among a diversity of payment providers and payment types has the potential to increase the choices available to businesses and consumers, reduce transactions costs, and foster innovation in end-user services, although it could also contribute to fragmentation of the current payments system. By providing access to a digital form of safe central bank money, a CBDC could provide an important foundation on which private-sector competition could flourish. Reduce cross-border frictionsCross-border payments, such as remittances, represent one of the most compelling use cases for digital currencies. The intermediation chains for cross-border payments are notoriously long, complex, costly, and opaque. Digitalization, along with a reduction in the number of intermediaries, holds considerable promise to reduce the cost, opacity, and time required for cross-border payments. While the introduction of CBDCs may be part of the solution, international collaboration on standard setting and protections against illicit activity will be required in order to achieve material improvements in cost, timeliness, and transparency.8 We are collaborating with international colleagues through the Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, and the G7 to ensure the U.S. stays abreast of developments related to CBDC abroad. We are engaging in several international efforts to improve the transparency, timeliness, and cost-effectiveness of cross-border payments. It will be important to be engaged at the outset on the development of any international standards that may apply to CBDCs, given the dollar's important role as a reserve currency. Complement currency and bank depositsA guiding principle for any payments innovation is that it should improve upon the existing payments system. Consumers have access to reliable money in the forms of private bank accounts and central bank issued currency, which form the underpinnings of the current retail payments system. The design of any CBDC should complement and not replace currency and bank accounts. Preserve financial stability and monetary policy transmissionThe introduction of a CBDC has the potential to have wide-reaching effects, and there are open questions about how CBDC could affect financial stability and monetary policy transmission. Some research indicates that the introduction of a CBDC might raise the risk of a flight out of deposits at weak banks in favor of CBDC holdings at moments of financial stress.9Other research indicates that the increase in competition could result in more attractive terms on transactions accounts and an overall increase in banking system deposits.10Banks play a critical role in credit intermediation and monetary policy transmission, as well as in payments. Thus, the design of any CBDC would need to include safeguards to protect against disintermediation of banks and to preserve monetary policy transmission more broadly. While it is critical to consider the ways in which a CBDC could introduce risks relative to the current payments system, it may increase resilience relative to a payments system where private money is prominent. Protect privacy and safeguard financial integrityThe design of any CBDC would need to both safeguard the privacy of households' payments transactions and prevent and trace illicit activity to maintain the integrity of the financial system, which will require the digital verification of identities. There are a variety of approaches to safeguarding the privacy of payments transactions while also identifying and preventing illicit activity and verifying digital identities. Addressing these critical objectives will require working across government agencies to assign roles and responsibilities for preventing illicit transactions and clearly establishing how consumer financial data would be protected. Increase financial inclusionToday 5.4 percent of American households lack access to bank accounts and the associated payment options they offer, and a further 18.7 percent were underbanked as of 2017.11The lack of access to bank accounts imposes high burdens on these households, whose financial resilience is often fragile. At the height of the pandemic, the challenges associated with getting relief payments to hard-to-reach households highlighted that it is important for all households to have transactions accounts. The Federal Reserve's proposals for strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act emphasize the value of banks providing cost-free, low-balance accounts and other banking services targeted to underbanked and unbanked communities.12And a core goal of FedNow is to provide ubiquitous access to an instant payments system via depository institutions. CBDC may be one part of a broader solution to the challenge of achieving ubiquitous account access.13Depending on the design, CBDC may have the ability to lower transaction costs and increase access to digital payments. In emergencies, CBDC may offer a mechanism for the swift and direct transfer of funds, providing rapid relief to those most in need. A broader solution to financial inclusion would also need to address any perceived barriers to maintaining a transaction account, along with the need to maintain up-to-date records on active accounts to reach a large segment of the population.14 To explore these broader issues, the Federal Reserve is undertaking research on financial inclusion. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta is launching a public–private sector collaboration as a Special Committee on Payments Inclusion to ensure that cash-based and vulnerable populations can safely access and benefit from digital payments.15This work is complemented by a new Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland initiative to explore the prospects for CBDC to increase financial inclusion. The initiative will identify CBDC design features and delivery approaches focused on expanding access to individuals who do not currently use traditional financial services. Technology ConsiderationsMultidisciplinary teams at the Federal Reserve are investigating the technological and policy issues associated with digital innovations in payments, clearing, and settlement, including the benefits and risks associated with a potential U.S. CBDC. For example, the TechLab group at the Federal Reserve Board is performing hands-on research and experimentation on potential future states of money, payments, and digital currencies. A second group, the Digital Innovations Policy program, is considering a broad range of policy issues associated with the rise of digital payments, including the potential benefits and risks associated with CBDC. To deepen our research on the technological design of a CBDC, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is partnering with Massachusetts Institute of Technology's (MIT) Digital Currency Initiative on Project Hamilton to build and test a hypothetical digital currency platform using leading edge technology design options.16This work aims to research the feasibility of the core processing of a CBDC, while remaining agnostic about a range of policy decisions. MIT and the Boston Fed plan to release a white paper next quarter that will document the ability to meet goals on throughput of geographically dispersed transactions with core processing and create an open source license for the code. Subsequent work will explore how addressing additional requirements, including resiliency, privacy, and anti-money-laundering features, will impact core processing performance and design. Banking ActivitiesResearch and experimentation are also occurring at supervised banking institutions to explore new technology to enhance their own operations and in response to demands from their clients for services such as custody of digital assets. While distributed ledger technology may have the potential to improve efficiencies, increase competition, and lower costs, digital assets pose heightened risks such as those related to Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money laundering, cybersecurity, price volatility, privacy, and consumer compliance. The Federal Reserve is actively monitoring developments in this area, engaging with the industry and other regulators, and working to identify any regulatory, supervisory, and oversight framework gaps. Given that decisions at one banking agency can have implications for the other agencies, it is important that regulators work together to develop common approaches to ensure that banks are appropriately identifying, monitoring, and managing risks associated with digital assets. Public EngagementIn light of the growing role of digital private money in the broader migration to digital payments, the potential use of foreign CBDCs in cross-border payments, and the importance of financial inclusion, the Federal Reserve is stepping up its research and public engagement on a digital version of the U.S. dollar. Members of Congress and executive agencies are similarly exploring this important issue. As noted above, to help inform these efforts, the Federal Reserve plans to issue a discussion paper to solicit public comment on a range of questions related to payments, financial inclusion, data privacy, and information security, with regard to a CBDC in the U.S. context.17The Federal Reserve remains committed to ensuring a safe, inclusive, efficient, and innovative payments system that works for all Americans. 1. I am grateful to Alexandra Fernandez, Sonja Danburg, David Mills, and David Pope of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Jerome Powell,"Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell Outlines the Federal Reserve's Response to Technological Advances Driving Rapid Change in the Global Payments Landscape,"Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System news release, May 20, 2021.Return to text 3. See Lael Brainard,"The Digitalization of Payments and Currency: Some Issues for Consideration,"remarks at the Symposium on the Future of Payments, Stanford University, California, February 5, 2021.Return to text 4. See, for instance, Joshua R. Greenberg,Bank Notes and Shinplasters: The Rage for Paper Money in the Early Republic(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2020).Return to text 5. Codruta Boar and Róbert Szemere,"Payments go (even more) digital"(Basel: Bank for International Settlements, January 2021).Return to text 6. Kelsey Coyle, Laura Kim, and Shaun O'Brien,Consumer Payments and the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Second Supplement to the 2020 Findings from the Diary of Consumer Payment Choice(San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 2021).Return to text 7. Marie-Hélène Felt, Fumiko Hayashi, Joanna Stavins, and Angelika Welte,Distributional Effects of Payment Card Pricing and Merchant Cost Pass-through in the United States and Canada(PDF),Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research Department Working Papers No. 20-13 (Boston: FRB Boston, 2020).Return to text 8. See Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures,Enhancing cross-border payments: building blocks of a global roadmap Stage 2 report to the G20(PDF)(Basel: BIS, July 2020); and Financial Stability Board,Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Stage 3 Roadmap(PDF)(Washington: FSB, October 13, 2020).Return to text 9. Christian Pfister,Monetary Policy and Digital Currencies: Much Ado about Nothing?(PDF)Banque de France Working Paper 642 (Paris: Banque de France, 2017).Return to text 10. John Barrdear and Michael Kumhof,The Macroeconomics of Central Bank Issued Digital Currencies, Bank of England Working Paper No. 605 (London: BOE, July 18, 2016), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2811208.Return to text 11. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,How America Banks: Household Use of Banking and Financial Services(Washington: FDIC, October 19, 2020); and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households(Washington: FDIC, 2017).Return to text 12. See, for instance the Bank On National Account Standards, https://2wvkof1mfraz2etgea1p8kiy-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Bank-On-National-Account-Standards-2021-2022.pdf.Return to text 13. See Jesse Leigh Maniff,Inclusion by Design: Crafting a Central Bank Digital Currency to Reach All Americans, (PDF)Payments System Research Briefing, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (Kansas City: FRB Kansas, December 2, 2020); and John Crawford, Lev Menand, and Morgan Ricks,"FedAccounts: Digital Dollars," (PDF)George Washington Law Review, Vol. 89, p. 113, January 28, 2021.Return to text 14. For more information, see the Federal Reserve Community Reinvestment Act Proposed Rulemaking athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/community-reinvestment-act-proposed-rulemaking.htm.Return to text 15. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,"New Committee to Advance Safe, Efficient, Inclusive Payments,"news release, May 12, 2021.Return to text 16. See Eric Rosengren,"Central Bank Perspectives on Central Bank Digital Currencies,"remarks at the panel discussion of the Program on International Financial Systems, Harvard Law School, May 12, 2021, ; Jim S. Cunha,"Boston Fed's Digital Dollar Research Project Honors 2 Hamiltons, Alexander and Margaret,"Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, February 25, 2021; and Lael Brainard,"An Update on Digital Currencies,"remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Innovation Office Hours, August 13, 2020.Return to text 17. See Jerome Powell,"Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell Outlines the Federal Reserve's Response to Technological Advances Driving Rapid Change in the Global Payments Landscape,"Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System news release, May 20, 2021.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the National Association of Insurance Commissioners International Insurance Forum (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you for inviting me to speak today. Over the years, I have enjoyed working with many of the insurance regulators participating in this conference, and I look forward to the day—already very near—when we will again have such events in person. The Federal Reserve has a closer connection to the insurance industry than most realize. Insurance and insurers relate closely to the Federal Reserve's mission to provide the nation with a safe, flexible, and stable financial system. Insurers play a crucial role in securing the safety and financial stability of American households. Insurers also play a key role in many financial markets, including as among the largest investors in certain asset classes. Indeed, the Federal Reserve arguably owes its creation, which followed the Panic of 1907, at least in part to the insurance industry. Some scholars have argued that it was the catastrophic 1906 San Francisco earthquake that caused the Panic of 1907.1The 1906 earthquake left over half of San Francisco homeless. Such widespread destruction of one of the country's largest cities had a commensurate effect on the economy and insurance industry. Fearing that the U.S. financial markets could not absorb that many dollars in asset sales, many European insurers paid claims by withdrawing money from foreign banks and shipping gold across the Atlantic. The Bank of England's gold supply accordingly dropped 14 percent. It responded to this gold outflow with measures that contributed to the panic and, after an admittedly long chain of events, led to my being here today. Of course, now we have a different financial system and better means to coordinate an international response to such events. One of these mechanisms is the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which I chair. Insurance continues to be an important part of the FSB's mission in collaboration with other governments and organizations, particularly the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). So today, I would like to highlight a few of the Federal Reserve's priorities on insurance regulation and supervision, both domestically and internationally. COVID Event Monitoring and ResponseOne priority has been monitoring the impact on the insurance industry of what I refer to as the COVID event. And so far, the insurance sector has performed very well. Insurers entered the pandemic with strong capital levels, and the industry has not seen any large defaults. Insurance risk managers and regulators should be proud of this performance. The COVID event has also affected financial markets. The Fed continues to monitor these effects, including the impact on life insurers of sustained low interest rates. The long duration of some insurance products, paired with embedded policyholder options, can make it difficult to match cash flows and can create interest rate risk. Additionally, some savings products can be difficult for insurers to market when only returns of near 0 percent can be profitably guaranteed. And the COVID event has posed some challenges for supervisors. Social distancing has changed how financial products are distributed, how we supervise financial institutions, and how we collaborate in the regulatory community. For example, though both the IAIS and FSB have worked intensively at a distance—there is an FSB meeting of one sort or another every day of every week—it has been over a year since the IAIS or FSB has met in person. CapitalCurrently the Board's most significant project with respect to insurance and our role in supervision is the development of a capital rule for insurance depository institution holding companies, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act. We have engaged in a thorough and deliberative process in developing an appropriate capital rule, which has included both an advance notice of proposed rulemaking and a more recent proposal that we invited comment on. This deliberative approach is working well. Most of the comments we received on the proposal, which we're calling the Building Block Approach, or BBA, were supportive of both our process and the overall regulatory framework we proposed. And we are currently reviewing these comments and intend to publish a final rule soon. As we near the completion of this journey, I'd like to recap why we chose to propose the Building Block Approach, which adjusts and aggregates existing legal-entity capital requirements to produce an enterprise-wide capital requirement. The BBA is meant to address one of our biggest challenges in supervising companies that engage in both banking and insurance operations, which is how different these businesses are. No single, uniform approach to capital regulation is appropriate for companies in both sectors. The banking capital framework would not appropriately assess the capitalization of insurers. It is primarily based on risk-weighted assets. This framework would not capture many of insurers' liability risks, such as from natural catastrophes. Nor would any existing insurance capital rule appropriately assess the risks of a bank. So rather than trying to create a single capital framework that would work for all types of financial institutions, we decided to propose an aggregation approach that incorporates approaches developed specifically for each type of institution and its risks. The BBA uses the existing and time-tested frameworks that have been tailored specifically to measure appropriately particular risks. It assesses insurance risks using an insurance capital framework and banking risks using our banking capital framework. The suitability of such an aggregation approach for regulating the capital of a large, internationally active insurance group is being debated currently at the IAIS, as I will discuss in a moment. While there are disagreements at the margins, there are also many areas of agreement on the appropriate uses of an aggregation approach. The IAIS's Insurance Capital Standard (ICS) for internationally active insurance groups itself uses an aggregation approach to incorporate non-insurance risks. And at the other extreme, there is also agreement that it would not be appropriate to calculate the capital position of a large bank holding company that is not engaged in insurance by aggregating the capital positions of certain subsidiary banks and legal entities. A key issue in the international debate about the ICS is whether products, capital markets, and laws vary so much by country or region that a single, unified methodology cannot measure risk accurately. Are the differences in international insurance markets more like the significant differences between banking and insurance or like the less fundamental differences in the banking business models internationally? If the differences are large enough, a one-size-fits-all methodology could produce unintended consequences, send false signals to regulators or capital markets, and ultimately be destabilizing. The Insurance Policy Advisory Committee, or IPAC, is currently studying this issue by looking at the impact of a hypothetical adoption of the IAIS' Insurance Capital Standard on the U.S. industry, markets, and consumers. The IPAC is a 21-member advisory committee that was established by Congress in 2018 to advise the Board on international insurance capital standards and other insurance issues. The group is currently performing research on the potential impact of the Insurance Capital Standard—specifically on U.S. life and retirement products—and hopes to complete a review on this in the coming months. And I'm looking forward to seeing the result. For those that would like to contribute as a member of the IPAC, the IPAC will shortly be accepting applications. In addition to the Insurance Policy Advisory Committee, we're also working with the states and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), which I want to congratulate on adopting a model law related to their Group Capital Calculation (GCC) at the end of last year. We coordinated with the states and the NAIC to ensure that there would not be unnecessary duplication and burden between our two capital frameworks. While the Building Block Approach and Group Capital Calculation cannot be exactly aligned due to reasons that include our different legal mandates and restrictions, this collaboration has been successful. As one example, no group will be subject to both the BBA and GCC. Instead, the Fed and the states will share information on groups we both supervise. This reduces unnecessary burden on firms while still allowing appropriate supervision. Our close coordination with the states, the NAIC, and also the Federal Insurance Office extends to international policy development at the IAIS. The members of "Team USA," as we refer to this group, work together to advocate for the United States internationally. One important international project that I have already mentioned is the ICS. Two years ago, the ICS reached a milestone when the IAIS membership adopted ICS version 2.0 for use in a five-year monitoring period. The purpose of this monitoring period is to evaluate the functionality and performance of the ICS. Team USA has argued that as currently constructed, the ICS would not be appropriate as a capital rule for U.S. internationally active insurance groups. Its market adjusted valuation approach could introduce significant volatility into the capital measure and capital requirement, which could lead to procyclical economic effects and harm the ability of insurers to provide long-term savings products. Accordingly, Team USA and other interested jurisdictions continue to build on our work on the Group Capital Calculation and Building Block Approach to develop what the IAIS terms the Aggregation Method, which could be considered an equivalent implementation of a group capital rule for large, internationally active insurers in the United States. To accomplish that, Team USA is currently working with other IAIS members to develop criteria to assess whether the Aggregation Method and ICS have a sufficient level of comparability. These criteria are planned to be released by the IAIS for public comment at the end of this year or early next year. As I have mentioned, it is uncertain what the potential impact of the IAIS' ICS on markets might be and whether the ICS, after any changes, will ultimately be suitable for adoption in the U.S. These issues are being studied, but the COVID event has affected this work. The number of participating firms decreased in response to the COVID event. Data analysis planned by the IAIS has been interrupted. The Fed would like to see the monitoring period extended by a year or longer given the unforeseen and unavoidable delays of the last year. This would allow for completing the originally intended analysis and incorporating any needed design changes. The Federal Reserve continues to advocate for the IAIS to have a transparent process that allows for meaningful opportunities for public comment in all its work. Supervisory FrameworkI'd also like to mention another project that we have been working on here at home. We are developing a tailored supervisory framework for the insurance savings and loan holding companies (ISLHCs) that we supervise. Our development of this framework recognizes that the risks of ISLHCs are different than other banking organizations. This supervisory framework, which we plan to publish for public comment later this year, will describe our tailored expectations for these firms, how we will rate them, and how we rely on the work of state insurance supervisors to avoid duplication and undue burden. Climate ChangeFinally, climate change is another emerging risk that we are monitoring. Broad climate policy is the role of Congress and other federal agencies, not the Federal Reserve. The Board, however, expects all firms that it supervises, including insurance savings and loan holding companies, to manage all material risks, whatever the source—which can include climate risk. The insurance industry has been at the forefront of work to better understand climate-related financial risks, including through climate change modeling. While the Federal Reserve relies on fellow prudential regulators to supervise specific ISLHC entities, we also recognize that insurers have much to offer in understanding an emerging area of focus for the broader financial sector. ConclusionThat is a brief summary of the Fed's work relating to the insurance industry. Our involvement with the industry is longstanding, reflecting insurance's central role in financial markets and its importance in helping households and businesses manage their risks. That involvement deepened after the global financial crisis, when Congress gave us additional responsibility for supervising certain insurers. More recently, our involvement has included verifying that these insurers are capable of dealing with the unprecedented challenges posed by the COVID event. Another new challenge is understanding and ensuring that firms account for climate-related financial risks. And a central part of the Fed's agenda is working with other regulators and the industry to devise an appropriate approach to regulating capital—one that recognizes the unique role of insurance in the financial system and the distinctions between insurance companies and banks. Our deliberate process has helped build confidence among regulators and the industry and is bringing us to consensus. The public, which depends on a strong and stable insurance sector, has been well-served by that process and will benefit from the outcome. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you. I look forward to engaging with you all in the future. 1. Kerry A. Odell and Marc D. Weidenmier, "Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: The 1906 San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907,"J. Econ. Hist.64, no. 4 (2004): 1002–1027.Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Fostering a Resilient Economy and Financial System: The Role of Central Banks" 25th Annual Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by the Center for Financial Innovation and Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Amelia Island, FL (via webcast) Good morning, and thank you, Raphael. I am delighted to participate in the 25th Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which this year focuses on the role of central banks in fostering a resilient economy and financial system.1 Central banks can indeed make important contributions to the resilience of the economy and the financial system. In the case of the Federal Reserve, our responsibilities include ensuring that banks are well supervised and regulated, working with other government agencies through the Financial Stability Oversight Council to promote financial stability, and, of course, conducting a U.S. monetary policy that aims to achieve our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. As the title of my talk suggests, my remarks today will focus on the importance of some specific global financial linkages that are relevant to the execution and communication of U.S. monetary policy aimed at achieving our domestic mandates. Signs of financial globalization are abundant and evident across markets for many asset classes. But why and in what possible ways is financial globalization relevant for national monetary policies charged with achieving domestic mandates? A comprehensive and complete answer to this fundamental question is, of course, beyond the scope of a single speech, and so in my remarks today, I will focus specifically on two ways in which the integration and globalization of sovereign bond markets is relevant to the execution and communication of national monetary policies. Central banks rightly pay a lot of attention to domestic sovereign bond yields "across the curve" for at least two reasons. First, yield curves for nominal and inflation-indexed bonds provide useful—if also noisy—information about the expected future path of the policy rate, inflation, the business cycle, and the term premium required to hold sovereign bonds. Second, yields on long-maturity bonds represent, generally, a key channel in the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy and, specifically, are a fundamental building block markets use to discount cash flows relevant for valuing financial assets. To anticipate my bottom line, the message of this speech is that global integration of sovereign bond markets has important implications not only for how central banks extract relevant signals from observed yields on bonds issued by the domestic sovereign, but also for how central banks calibrate the transmission of policy and policy guidance to the real economy via the yields on long-maturity bonds that are relevant for saving, investment, and asset valuation. Sovereign Yields Embed Global FactorsThere is a rich academic and practitioner literature devoted to modeling and interpreting fluctuations in domestic sovereign yield curves. A fundamental empirical regularity that motivates much of this research is that, across time and geography, yields along any given sovereign curve tend to rise and fall—and steepen and flatten—together over time. This empirical regularity led Litterman and Scheinkman (1991) to hypothesize and demonstrate that in the market for U.S. Treasury securities, a very small number of common factors—two or, at most, three—are able to account not only for most of the time-series variation, but also for the cross-sectional dispersion in yields across the entire Treasury curve. Moreover, the two most empirically important factors extracted statistically from the Treasury yield curve have intuitive geometric interpretations as "level" and "slope." The "level" factor has approximately an equal effect on yields across the maturity spectrum—thus, changes in the level factor are often referred to as "parallel shifts" in the yield curve—and accounts for most of the variance in yields across the full range of maturities. The "slope" factor has an effect that is increasing (monotonically) in maturity—thus, changes in the slope factor are often referred to as "steepening" or "flattening" pivots in the yield curve. The original Litterman and Scheinkman factor model, with its geometric interpretation of level and slope factors, has held up remarkably well over the ensuing three decades and has been replicated for sovereign yield curves across scores of countries around the world, revealing similar regularities. Indeed, many, if not most, major central banks—and certainly their central bank watchers—estimate yield curve models and extract the factors that are reflected in their domestic sovereign yield curves. So, for example, for the three major economies included infigure 1, one can easily extract—using the methodology developed in Diebold and Li (2006)—on a country-by-country basis, U.S., U.K., and German level factors as well as U.S., U.K., and German slope factors. As is clear from figure 1, level and slope factors extracted from these individual sovereign yield curves are highly correlated across these major sovereign bond markets. Economic theory suggests at least two reasons why the factors embedded in sovereign yield curves may be correlated across countries. First, this correlation will be present if the underlying macro fundamentals—for example, productivity growth, saving–investment imbalances, and longer-term inflation expectations—that drive the factors are correlated across countries.2Second, as is emphasized in Clarida (2019c) and Obstfeld (2020), this correlation will also be present if countries are tightly financially integrated even if fundamentals themselves are independent across countries.3 Interpreting the Global Level FactorFrom any set of level and slope factors extracted across a collection of sovereign yield curves, one can in turn extract a global level factor and a global slope factor that account for the correlation among the country-specific level and slope factors.4As can be seen in figure 1, the global level factor (the blue line) accounts for most of the evident downward trend and much of the variation relative to that trend in the estimated U.S., U.K., and German level factors. But what is this global level factor? Plausibly, the global level factor embedded in these three sovereign yield curves reflects the contribution of possibly several global macro fundamental drivers—including global productivity growth, the balance between global saving and investment, and longer-term inflation expectations—and likely also other "market" or "technical" factors specific to the trading of these sovereigns in the global bond market. As can be seen in figure 2, however, most of the trend and variation in the global level factor about this trend can be accounted for by the evolution of estimates of the neutral real interest rates in these countries.5Figure 2plots the global level factor against a simple average of the Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017, henceforth HLW) time-series estimates of $$r\ast\ $$—the neutral real interest rate consistent with trend growth and stable inflation—for the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Now, while it is certainly intuitive that an $$r\ast\ $$ index for these countries would be correlated with the global level factor extracted from their yield curves, the degree to which this simple index can account for the trend and variation in the global level factor around this trend is striking. And because central banks, including the Federal Reserve, typically channel Milton Friedman (1968) and believe that the evolution of $$r\ast\ $$ primarily reflects nonmonetary factors that are beyond the central bank's control, an "$$r\ast\ $$ theory" of the level factor—if true—has important implications for how central banks extract signal from noise from sovereign yield curves as well as for how they calibrate the stance of monetary policy consistent with a credible inflation target. Under this interpretation, and as was anticipated years ago by Greenspan (2005), Bernanke (2005), Clarida (2005), and others, credible inflation-targeting central banks operating in an integrated global capital market—at least when they are operating away from their effective lower bound (ELB)—are primarily in the yield curve "slope" business, but much less so in the yield curve "level" business.6 Figure 3shows the relationship between the yield on a 10-year Treasury note and an estimate of the neutral nominal U.S. policy rate, which I set equal to the HLW estimate of $$r\ast\ $$ for the United States plus a 2 percent inflation objective, a proxy for the neutral nominal interest rate when longer-term inflation expectations are anchored at the 2 percent target. As is evident from the figure and as can be verified econometrically, there has been since at least the 1990s a stable, mean-reverting dynamic relationship between the benchmark nominal Treasury yield and a neutral nominal interest rate proxy derived from the HLW time-series estimates for $$r\ast\ $$ in the United States. Interpreting the Slope FactorI would now like to illustrate what I mean when I say that the slope of the yield curve is an important channel through which monetary policy is transmitted. Figure 4 plots the Diebold-Li (DL) slope factor for the United States—which is included in figure 1—against the spread between the HLW estimate of the U.S. neutral nominal policy rate and the actual federal funds rate (hereafter the "policy rate spread"). As is evident fromfigure 4, most of the variation in the DL slope factor for the Treasury yield curve can be accounted for by changes in the U.S. policy rate spread.7A simple regression over the 1999:Q1 to 2019:Q4 sample of the slope factor on the policy rate spread shown in figure 4 yields anR2of 0.84 with a coefficient on the policy rate spread of 1.23. In other words, over the past 20 years, more than three-fourths of the variance of the Treasury slope factor can be accounted for by the policy rate spread, which is obviously something the Federal Reserve can control when it sets the federal funds rate. The remaining variance of the benchmark Treasury slope factor is, by construction, accounted for by factors that are uncorrelated with the U.S. policy rate spread. A similar empirical relationship between the policy rate spread and the slope factor embedded in gilt and bund yield curves is also evident in the data, although there is some evidence in these markets of a structural break in these relationships between the slope factor and the policy rate spread sometime after the Global Financial Crisis.8In the interest of time, I shall not put forward a theory of what accounts for the residual variance of yield curve slope factors after accounting for the policy rate spread itself, but obvious candidates (certainly at the ELB) would include forward guidance about the path of the future policy rate as well as actual and prospective large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs. Identifying Causation from Bond Yield CorrelationsIt is a truism that "correlation is not causation," and this is especially the case when trying to interpret contemporaneous correlation among asset prices generally and among bond yields in particular. Having identified one possible, parsimonious set of economic fundamentals that can help account for yield curve fluctuations in three major sovereign markets, I will now review what the empirical evidence has to say about the direction of causality reflected in observed correlations among sovereign yields.9I will explore two possibilities. The first possibility is that, in reality, there are no latent "global" factors whatsoever, but rather there are just U.S. factors that exogenously fluctuate and cause the global correlations in bond yields we observe in the data. There is a vast literature (Claessens, Stracca, and Warnock, 2016, provide an overview) that documents the existence of spillovers from U.S. monetary policy, especially to emerging market (EM) financial conditions, although the recent paper by Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020) suggests that the degree of those spillovers depends importantly on the source of the shock that triggers changes in Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) policy. In particular, as summarized infigure 5.1, they identified FOMC actions associated with "growth news" as those that were immediately followed by changes in the 10-year Treasury yield and the S&P 500 index in the same direction, whereas actions associated with "monetary news" elicited changes in yields and equity prices in opposite directions. Their key finding, illustrated infigure 5.2, was that FOMC policy rate surprises attributed to stronger U.S. growth generally have only moderate spillovers to EM financial conditions, whereas FOMC policy rate surprises attributed to U.S. inflationary pressures trigger more substantial spillovers to EM financial conditions. Regardless of the type of FOMC policy action, Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020) also found compelling evidence that the size of the spillover effects from the United States depends importantly on the degree of macroeconomic vulnerability of each emerging market economy (EME), with more vulnerable EMEs experiencing larger spillovers. While I certainly believe that both fundamental and financial shocks originating in the United States propagate throughout the global financial system and likely account for a significant share of the asset price correlations across global markets that we observe in the data, the evidence—and introspection—suggests to me that causality can and often does run both ways.10Anecdotally, it is not difficult to recall events—plausibly exogenous to the United States—that have triggered spillovers from foreign sovereign markets to the U.S. Treasury market. A prominent example would be the surprise Brexit vote of June 23, 2016. As the news of the Brexit vote filtered through global markets that day, sovereign yields plunged in both Germany and the United States. Indeed, as is shown infigure 6, on that day, the 10-year Treasury yield fell almost 20 basis points, the single largest one-day decline in the eight years—and over 2,000 trading days—between January 2012 and March 2020.11 The evidence that two-way causality is reflected in sovereign bond yield correlations is not limited to one-off geopolitical events such as Brexit. For instance, Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018) examined 12 years of monetary policy announcements by the FOMC and the European Central Bank (ECB)—a combined total of 266 monetary policy communications—focusing on how sovereign yields in one jurisdiction responded to monetary policy announcements made in the other. Their main findings are summarized in the two panels infigure 7. The left panel presents some of the evidence of the well-known, statistically significant spillovers from FOMC policy announcements to euro-area bond markets. But, as is shown in the right panel, the authors found that the spillover effect from ECB policy announcements to U.S. yields is roughly as large as that from the FOMC announcements to bund yields.12 In another influential study using a very different identification methodology, Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2011) estimated significant and approximately equal spillovers from U.S. bond market shocks to EU bond markets, and from EU bond market shocks to the U.S. Treasury market.13They attributed their findings to significant incipient and anticipated portfolio allocation flows across the two jurisdictions that respond elastically to expected rate-of-return differentials.14 Concluding RemarksTo sum up, I believe that in extracting signal from noise from the Treasury yield curve, it is essential to incorporate the fact that observed yields in the United States and other major sovereign markets are determined in a global general equilibrium that is reflected, at least in part, in the global level of neutral policy rates and the state of longer-term global inflation expectations.15Conditional on neutral policy rates and longer-term inflation expectations, the Federal Reserve and other major central banks can be thought of as calibrating and conducting the transmission of policy—be it through rates, forward guidance, or LSAPs—primarily through the slopes of their yield curves and much less so via their levels.16Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to my conversation with Raphael. ReferencesBauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2020). "Interest Rates under Falling Stars,"American Economic Review,vol. 110 (May), pp. 1316–54. Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10. Bomfim, Antulio N. (1997). "The Equilibrium Fed Funds Rate and the Indicator Properties of Term-Structure Spreads,"Economic Inquiry,vol. 35 (October), pp. 830–46. Clarida, Richard H. (2005). "Our Post-Bubble World,"Wall Street Journal,April 11. ——— (2019a). "Global Shocks and the U.S. Economy," speech delivered at "The Euro Area: Staying the Course through Uncertainties," BDF Symposium and 34th SUERF Colloquium, sponsored by Banque de France and the European Money and Finance Forum, Paris, March 28. ——— (2019b). "Monetary Policy, Price Stability, and Equilibrium Bond Yields: Success and Consequences," speech delivered at the High-Level Conference on Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility, cosponsored by the Bank for International Settlements, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, November 12. ——— (2019c). "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination,"International Finance,vol. 22 (Spring), pp. 2–19. Clarida, Richard H., Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp 147–80. Claessens, Stijn, Livio Stracca, and Francis E. Warnock (2016). "International Dimensions of Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,"Journal of International Money and Finance,vol. 67 (October), pp 1–7. Curcuru, Stephanie E., Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018). "Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Diebold, Francis X., and Canlin Li (2006). "Forecasting the Term Structure of Government Bond Yields,"Journal of Econometrics,vol. 130 (February), pp. 337–64. Diebold, Francis X., Canlin Li, and Vivian Z. Yue (2008). "Global Yield Curve Dynamics and Interactions: A Dynamic Nelson-Siegel Approach,"Journal of Econometrics,vol. 146 (October), pp. 351–63. Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roberto Rigobon (2011). "Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission,"Journal of Applied Econometrics,vol. 26 (September-October), pp. 948–74. Ferreira, Thiago, and Samer Shousha (2021). "Supply of Sovereign Safe Assets and Global Interest Rates," International Finance Discussion Papers 1315. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March) pp. 1–17. Gospodinov, Nikolay (2020). "Global Factors in U.S. Yield Curve," working paper, July, available athttps://sites.google.com/site/gospodinovfed. Greenspan, Alan (2005). "Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 16. Hoek, Jasper, Steve Kamin, and Emre Yoldas (2020). "When Is Bad News Good News? U.S. Monetary Policy, Macroeconomic News, and Financial Conditions in Emerging Markets," International Finance Discussion Papers 1269. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"Journal of International Economics,vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–1070. Litterman, Robert B., and Josè Scheinkman (1991). "Common Factors Affecting Bond Returns,"Journal of Fixed Income,vol. 1 (Summer), pp. 54–61. Obstfeld, Maurice (2020). "Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 16 (February), pp. 73–132. Panetta, Fabio (2021). "Monetary Autonomy in a Globalised World," welcome address delivered at the joint BIS, BOE, ECB, and IMF conference "Spillovers in a 'Post-Pandemic, Low-for-Long' World," Frankfurt, April 26. Rigobon, Roberto (2003). "Identification through Heteroskedasticity,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 85 (November), pp. 777–92. AppendixWe derive in this appendix a simple model that can be used to interpret the empirical relationship between Treasury yields, the neutral real interest rate, and the policy rate spread. Begin with the identity that the policy rate spread equals the difference between the neutral interest rate $$(r_t^\ast+\pi^\ast)$$ and the current policy rate: $$s_t=r_t^\ast+\pi^\ast-R_{t,1}.$$ Now define then-period term premium $$ \tau_{t,n} $$ through the long-term rate definition: $$R_{t,n}=E_t\left(\frac{1}{n}\right)\ \sum_{i=0}^{n-1}{R_{t+i,1}+\ \tau_{t,n}}.$$ Consider a simple data-generating process consistent with Laubach and Williams (2003) for the neutral real interest rate $$r_t^\ast=\ r_{t-1}^\ast+w_t$$ and a simple first-order autoregression for the policy rate spread $$s_t=\ \rho\ s_{t-1}+e_{t,}$$ where $$ w_t $$ and $$ e_t $$ are assumed to be some unforecastable disturbances. Then at any horizon $$ n $$ we have $$R_{t,n}=\ r_t^\ast+\ \pi^\ast-\frac{1}{n}\left.\frac{\left(1-\rho^n\right)}{\left(1-\rho\right)}\right.s_t+\ \tau_{t,\ n}.$$ Regress $$ \tau_{t,n} $$ on the policy rate spread $$\tau_{t,n}=\ \tau_{0,n}+\beta_ns_t+v_{t,n,}$$ where $$ \tau_{0,n} $$ and $$ \beta_n $$ are regression parameters and $$ v_{t,n} $$ is the residual, and we have (cf. figure 3) $$R_{t,n}=\ r_t^\ast+\ \pi^\ast+\ \tau_{0,n}+\left[\beta_n-\left.\frac{1}{n}\frac{\left(1-\rho^n\right)}{\left(1-\rho\right)}\right.\right]s_t+v_{t,n}\ .\ $$ So yields at each maturity are anchored by the common neutral nominal rate $$ r_t^{\ast} + \pi^{\ast} $$ (Bauer and Rudebusch, 2020). The difference between the long rates $$ R_{t,n} $$ and the neutral interest rate $$ (r_t^{\ast} + \pi^{\ast}) $$ is a linear function of the policy rate spread with a loading that depends on the dynamics of the policy rate spread as well as the covariance between the spread and the term premium. On May 27, 2021, this speech was updated to add a sentence to footnote 10 and add the following to the "References" section: Gospodinov, Nikolay (2020). "Global Factors in U.S. Yield Curve," working paper, July, available athttps://sites.google.com/site/gospodinovfed. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am grateful to Antulio Bomfim for assistance in drafting these remarks, to Canlin Li for contributing the empirical work, and to Hannah Firestone for preparing the figures.Return to text 2. For instance, Clarida (2019b) discusses the role of falling neutral real rates and longer-term inflation expectations worldwide in the decline in global sovereign bond yields.Return to text 3. See Ferreira and Shousha (2021) for a rigorous econometric study of the fundamental determinants of real interest rates in global general equilibrium.Return to text 4. Diebold, Li, and Yue (2008) extended the single-country model developed by Diebold and Li (2006) to a multicountry framework that allows for both global and country-specific factors to affect domestic yield curves. In these remarks, for ease of exposition, I define the global level factor as the simple average of the Diebold-Li country level factors (renormalized as discussed in the notes to figure 1).Return to text 5. Recent work by Bauer and Rudebusch (2020) highlights the role of movements in neutral real interest rates in the dynamics of the yield curve.Return to text 6. Interestingly, it was the success of credible inflation targeting, in addition to financial globalization, that has put central banks in the "slope" business. In a world in which inflation expectations are not well anchored, monetary policy can have a major effect on the level of interest rates by shifting, for better or worse, longer-term inflation expectations, as was the case in the United States from the 1960s through the early 1990s (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000).Return to text 7. See Bomfim (1997) for an early exploration of the "policy rate spread" as a factor embedded in the Treasury yield curve as well as an early effort to obtain an estimate of $$r\ast\ $$ consistent with medium-term macroeconomic equilibrium. See also the appendix for a simple model linking the neutral nominal interest rate, the yield curve, the policy rate spread, and the term premium.Return to text 8. For example, over the subsample 1999:Q1–2014:Q1, a regression of the DL slope factor embedded in the gilt (bund) yield curve on the U.K. (euro area) policy rate spread yields anR2of 0.83 (0.61) with a coefficient on the policy rate spread of 0.91 (0.96), results that are comparable with the estimates for the Treasury curve discussed earlier. However, in the remaining subsample 2014:Q2 to 2019:Q4, the slope factor in these two countries is much flatter than predicted by the empirical relationship with the policy rate spread that holds in the earlier subsample.Return to text 9. I think of $$r\ast\ $$ and the policy rate spread as mapping a potentially large set of macroeconomic fundamentals into two scalars and thus enabling dimension reduction compatible with a factor model structure. For example, the Ferreira and Sousha (2021) specification for $$r\ast\ $$ includes six explanatory variables, one of which is a trade-weighted index of global productivity and demographic trends. Likewise, one can always write the policy rate spread as $$r\ast\ +\ \pi\ast\ -\ \{{r\ast\ +\ \pi\ast\ +\ 1.5(\pi\ -\ \pi\ast)\ +\ 0.5(gap)\ +\ dev}\ \} =\ 1.5(\pi\ -\ \pi\ast)\ -\ 0.5(gap)-\ dev$$, where $$dev$$ is the deviation from a Taylor rule with a time-varying intercept equal to $$r\ast\ +\ \pi\ast\ $$.Return to text 10. For example, Ferreira and Sousha (2021) attribute 85 basis points of the decline in U.S. neutral real interest rates since 2000 to global spillovers. Moreover, in their model, foreign central bank purchases of U.S. Treasury securities are a significant contributor to fluctuations in the supply of safe assets, which in turn empirically account for much of the variation in global real interest rates in their model. The notion of two-way causality was also examined empirically by Gospodinov (2020), who added a global factor to an otherwise standard affine term structure model of the U.S. Treasury curve.Return to text 11. Also note from figure 6 that in the weeks before and after the Brexit vote, the 10-year Treasury yield and the dollar–pound exchange rate were rising and falling together as the market assessed the likelihood of a Brexit vote (before) and the implications of a Brexit vote (after).Return to text 12. The finding of two-way causality suggests that major central banks (not just the Federal Reserve) still retain a fair amount of "monetary autonomy," as discussed recently by Panetta (2021).Return to text 13. Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2011) also examined potential spillovers between the United States and the euro area in the money and equity markets, finding that, particularly in the latter, spillovers from the euro area to the United States were very small, whereas those from the United States to the euro area were quite sizable. They attributed this asymmetry to the central role that U.S. equity markets play in world equity markets. Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2011) used Rigobon's (2003) identification-through-heteroskedasticity methodology to estimate a structural model where various asset prices are determined simultaneously in the United States and the euro area.Return to text 14. The evidence of two-way causality is also consistent with the U.S. economy's increasing integration with the rest of the world, which has made it more exposed to foreign shocks (Clarida, 2019a).Return to text 15. Of course, there are very likely other fundamentals—such as equilibrium term premiums required to hold long-duration sovereign bonds and, in many countries, default and illiquidity premiums required to hold riskier sovereign debt—that are embedded in yield curve level and slope factors in addition to neutral policy rates and longer-term inflation expectations.Return to text 16. The focus of these remarks has been on sovereign bond markets and monetary policy, but monetary policy is, of course, also transmitted through the foreign exchange market. See Clarida (2019c) for a global model of monetary policy, exchange rates, and neutral real interest rates.Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate on May 25, 2021. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to testify today. Last May, my colleagues and I came before you—in a virtual format for the first time—discussing our actions to maintain a strong banking sector as a source of support for consumers, households, and businesses. I'd like to thank the Committee for its flexibility and its commitment to ongoing, open dialogue, especially in the course of such a challenging year. My remarks one year ago came after the onset of sudden and pervasive financial stress.1Early turmoil in overseas financial markets quickly crossed borders and, within days, had reached almost every asset class and corner of the financial system. From the beginning, the causes of this strain were clear, rooted in the policy measures taken to address the outbreak of COVID-19. But at that time, the full implications of the COVID event remained unclear, and the costs would continue to mount. The American economy and banking sector then remained at the edge of the storm, with one wave of stress behind us and others yet to come. Today, the storm waters are receding. The economy is beginning a strong recovery, which owes much to an extraordinary, coordinated, and sustained campaign of support, by both Congress and the Federal Reserve, that helped clear a path to the other side of the COVID event. As the Federal Reserve's recent reports detail, banking organizations have remained an important source of strength in this recovery.2Entering the COVID event, the banking system was fortified by over 10 years of work to improve safety and soundness, from both regulators and the banks themselves. Higher levels of capital and liquidity, better risk management, and more robust systems let them absorb an unprecedented shock—while providing refuge from market instability, delivering essential public aid, and working constructively to support borrowers and communities.3In short, the full set of post-2008 reforms—as refined and recalibrated by the work of the last four years—ensured that this time would truly be different than the last. Today, the U.S. banking system is actually more liquid and better capitalized than it was a year ago, with over $100 billion in additional loan loss reserves, leaving it well-positioned to weather future shocks. While a strong recovery is underway, it is not yet complete.4Some households and businesses are still vulnerable, even as we enter this last stretch of the return to normal. Our role, as policymakers, is to support the financial system and the economy through the end of this transition back to normal operations. Our challenge, however, is to do so as circumstances change and the nation's need for that support evolves.5 Most immediately, we have worked to align our emergency actions with other relief efforts, as the economic situation improves. Last spring, the Federal Reserve adopted a set of extraordinary and mostly temporary measures to ease the strain in financial markets and ensure banks could support communities and meet customer needs.6In the last six months, we have maintained or extended some of those measures, where appropriate, to preserve household assistance and promote continued access to credit.7 We also began the transition back to our normal activities, our normal supervisory posture, and our normal rulebook. We closed 12 of our 13 emergency lending facilities; let temporary changes to our leverage rules expire as planned; and announced plans to transition large banks back to our regular capital regulation program, calibrating dividend and share repurchase restrictions to the results of the upcoming supervisory stress tests.8 These are important near-term steps, and they are part of any responsible transition out of our emergency posture. However, our role and our responsibility extend much further than merely returning to normal. We also have an obligation to look closely at the last year, to understand how the financial system came to experience such severe stress, and to identify and act on any lessons we find. The COVID event was a unique shock, but it was also the first real-world test of the regulatory and supervisory regime established after the 2008 financial crisis. As such, it gives us a chance to examine that regime's strengths and shortcomings, and to position it well for future challenges. Any list of lessons must begin with the strong performance of supervisory stress testing.9The stress-testing program not only prepared banks for a period of prolonged hardship; it also clarified their health and resilience as the COVID event progressed. This role was a return to the original purpose of stress testing and a confirmation of its earliest use during the 2008 financial crisis. It also, however, affirmed the ways that stress testing has evolved in recent years, into a more flexible, more transparent anchor for the Federal Reserve's broader capital program. For example, while it was prudent—given that this was the first real-world test of the post-2008 system—for us to impose temporary capital distribution restrictions beyond those that form part of that system, we now know that our framework works. We can have particular confidence in the framework when it is supplemented and informed by a real-time stress testing regime. In the future, having learned the lessons of this test, we will be able to rely on the automatic restrictions of our carefully developed framework when the stress test tells us the system will be resilient, rather than imposead hocand roughly improvised limitations. Other areas, however, are ripe for closer examination, both domestically and internationally. These include the strains in short-term funding markets, and the second destabilizing run on prime money market mutual funds in roughly a decade, which required significant public intervention to address.10Despite some efforts after the 2008 crisis to enhance the resiliency of these investment vehicles, the basic model of a seemingly stable-value fund, backed by assets the value and liquidity of which varies, remained vulnerable. Work is ongoing both domestically and at the Financial Stability Board on how to better address these vulnerabilities. Areas for further examination also include Treasury markets, where last year's selling pressures overwhelmed dealers' willingness or ability to intermediate, and which continue to be a focus for the Board, the Department of the Treasury, and other regulators.11Among other measures, we are reviewing the design and calibration of the supplementary leverage ratio, which was originally gauged for a financial system with far lower levels of cash reserves and a much smaller Treasury market.12 Finally, these areas for further review include a rapidly changing set of customer practices; changing patterns in the use of financial services, by consumers and businesses; and a changing relationship between banks and their nonbank partners. These trends predate the COVID event, but the past year accelerated them dramatically, with important implications for financial stability, safety and soundness, consumer protection, and underserved communities' access to safe and fair financial services. The Federal Reserve is working to understand and address this changing landscape in a number of ways—from the use of artificial intelligence, to the evolving need for operational resiliency, to the growing risk of disruptive shocks from cybersecurity failures.13 We are not alone in our work to understand these post-COVID-event lessons. We have valuable and willing partners in our fellow regulators, in other agencies across government, and in our colleagues abroad. We continue to participate actively in relevant work at the Financial Stability Board and other international forums, since financial risks do not respect the jurisdictional lines between agencies or countries. And we are committed to keeping Congress closely and actively informed of our efforts, mindful of the effect these trends may have on our core mandate. This work is critical, but only in service of a more fundamental goal: a safe, transparent, and efficient approach to supervision and regulation, which ensures the financial system is strong and stable enough to withstand even historic shocks.14Those values are of perennial importance, and they continue to be the bedrock of the Federal Reserve's work.15They also animate two of our highest priorities for this year: to finalize the post-crisis Basel III reforms and to complete the long-overdue transition away from LIBOR. On the former, we remain committed to implementing Basel III for our internationally active banking organizations in a full, timely, and consistent manner, with a rulemaking proposal for public comment later this year. For LIBOR, by contrast, the time for comment, speculation, and delay has long since passed. Continued use of LIBOR in new contracts after 2021 would create safety and soundness risks, and we will examine bank practices accordingly.16 The COVID event is not behind us, and the vulnerabilities it exposed are not gone. As we continue to recover, the "vast influence of accident" can only grow, with consequences that can disproportionately fall on the most vulnerable.17However, we can do more than just wait and hope that the path out of the COVID event is smooth. We can work to ensure the financial system is resilient enough to support consumers, households, and businesses, and we can recommit ourselves to supporting the economy through the completion of the recovery. The work we undertake to learn the lessons of the past year is a critical step in upholding that commitment. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 1. Randal K. Quarles, "Supervision and Regulation Report" (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., May 12, 2020).Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report,April 2021(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April 2021); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Financial Stability Report, May 2021(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2021). TheSupervision and Regulation Reportaccompanies this testimony.Return to text 3. See Randal K. Quarles, "Remarks at the Hoover Institution" (speech at the Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA (via webcast), October 14, 2020).Return to text 4. See, e.g., Jerome H. Powell, "Getting Back to a Strong Labor Market" (speech at the Economic Club of New York (via webcast), February 10, 2021).Return to text 5. SeeJerome H. Powell, "Community Development" (speech at the "2021 Just Economy Conference" sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), May 3, 2021), ("Lives and livelihoods have been affected in ways that vary from person to person, family to family, and community to community").Return to text 6. For a catalogue of these actions, see "Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last updated March 15, 2021.Return to text 7. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces it will extend its Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, or PPPLF, by three months to June 30, 2021," news release, March 8, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces the second extension of a rule to bolster the effectiveness of the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)," news release, February 9, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve announces the extension of its temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines and the temporary repurchase agreement facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA repo facility) through September 30, 2021," news release, December 16, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies provide temporary relief to community banking organizations," news release, November 20, 2020.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Temporary supplementary leverage ratio changes to expire as scheduled," news release, March 19, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces that the temporary change to its supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) for bank holding companies will expire as scheduled on March 31," news release, March 19, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve announces temporary and additional restrictions on bank holding company dividends and share repurchases currently in place will end for most firms after June 30, based on results from upcoming stress test," news release, March 25, 2021.Return to text 9. Randal K. Quarles, "Themistocles and the Mathematicians: The Role of Stress Testing" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA (via webcast), February 25, 2021); see alsoBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces results from second round of bank stress tests will be released Friday, December 18, at 4:30 p.m. EST," news release, December 4, 2020.Return to text 10. Randal K. Quarles, "The FSB in 2021: Addressing Financial Stability Challenges in an Age of Interconnectedness, Innovation, and Change" (speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), March 30, 2021).Return to text 11. Randal K. Quarles, "What Happened? What Have We Learned From It? Lessons from COVID-19 Stress on the Financial System" (speech at the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), October 15, 2020).Return to text 12. Seenote 8, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, news release, March 19, 2021.Return to text 13. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies seek wide range of views on financial institutions' use of artificial intelligence," news release, March 29, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,SR letter 20-24: "Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen Operational Resilience," November 2, 2020; see also "Jerome Powell: Full 2021 60 Minutes Interview Transcript,"60 Minutes Overtime, April 11, 2021, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/jerome-powell-full-2021-60-minutes-interview-transcript/.Return to text 14. Randal K. Quarles, "The Eye of Providence: Thoughts on the Evolution of Bank Supervision" (speech at the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard Law School, and Wharton School Conference: Bank Supervision: Past, Present, and Future (via webcast), December 11, 2020).Return to text 15. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board adopts final rule outlining and confirming the use of supervisory guidance for regulated institutions," news release, March 31, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board publishes frequently asked questions (FAQs) comprising existing legal interpretations related to a number of the Board's longstanding regulations," news release, March 31, 2021; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve publishes latest version of its supervision and regulation report," news release, November 6, 2020.Return to text 16. Randal K. Quarles, "Keynote Remarks" (speech at "The SOFR Symposium: The Final Year," an event hosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, New York, NY (via webcast), March 22, 2021); see also Mark Van Der Weide, "The End of LIBOR: Transitioning to an Alternative Interest Rate Calculation for Mortgages, Student Loans, Business Borrowing, and Other Financial Products" (testimony before the Subcommittee on Investor Protection, Entrepreneurship, and Capital Markets, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., April 15, 2021).Return to text 17. Thucydides,The History of the Peloponnesian War, translated by Richard Crawley, at Ch. 3.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At The Colorado Forum, Denver, Colorado (via webcast) Thank you for this opportunity to address the members of the Colorado Forum, which has been an arena for thoughtful discussion and debate for more than 40 years. Today I would like to discuss a subject that I expect is of great interest to Coloradans and others: the outlook for the U.S. economy in 2021. I believe that the economy has gained momentum in the past several months and is well positioned to grow strongly in 2021. Nevertheless, we have further to go to recover from the economic damage inflicted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and risks remain. As we all know, starting in late February or March of last year, widespread economic and social lockdowns and other effects of the pandemic caused the swiftest and deepest contraction in employment and economic activity since the Great Depression. Money markets, the Treasury market, and other parts of the financial system seized up, and there were fears of another severe financial crisis. The Federal Reserve stepped in quickly to assist, reviving several lending facilities used in the previous crisis and creating several new facilities. We also cut short-term interest rates to near zero and began purchasing large quantities of Treasury and agency securities to help sustain the flow of credit to households and businesses. Congress and the Administration also worked together to provide effective and timely support. Calm was restored in financial markets, and employment and output began growing in May, but it was a very deep hole to fill. Since that time, progress in controlling the pandemic has been a dominant force driving the economic recovery. Rapid progress last summer gave way to slower economic growth over the turn of the year, as infection rates once again surged. But after a substantial pickup in vaccinations and steep declines in virus-related hospitalizations and deaths, the economic outlook has brightened. Job creation had stalled over the winter months but improved again starting in February. Over the past year, we've seen a return of nearly 14 million jobs. Another significant factor contributing to the recovery is the resilience of private-sector businesses. Our economic recovery has been more rapid and stronger than many forecasters expected, partly due to the ability of businesses to adapt to conditions that none of them had planned for, and few even imagined could be possible. Initially, government assistance was important, but millions of businesses were at risk of closure. Instead, many are open and growing today due to the resourcefulness and determination of entrepreneurs and workers and their ability to adjust business plans and operations to deal with the effects of social-distancing and operating restrictions. Of course, technology helped a great deal, but businesses were able to find many other ways to maintain operations and sustain their connections to customers. In writing the history of these eventful times, I hope that the efforts of these businesses and the strength of America's market-based economy get the considerable credit they deserve. Recently, the incoming data indicate that economic activity is on an upswing, and the risks of more negative outcomes—especially those from COVID-19—appear to be easing. Vaccinations and the easing of operating and social-distancing restrictions are boosting consumer and business confidence, with the results clear to see in the data on spending. Retail sales surged nearly 10 percent in March and are actually above the trendline that was interrupted by the pandemic a year ago. One particularly encouraging signal in that report was a sharp expansion in spending on food services. I hope this is an indication that consumers are finally returning to in-person dining as spring arrives and local authorities allow restaurants to accommodate more diners. If so, and my fingers are crossed, it is a very good sign of further progress in one of the sectors hardest hit by the pandemic. In the job market, job gains rebounded to 916,000 in March. At our March meeting, my view was broadly in line with the median of projections of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), which anticipated the economy would grow between 5.8 percent and 6.6 percent in 2021. But the outlook has improved since then, and it now appears that real gross domestic product may increase close to or even above the higher end of that range. This annual increase would be the largest in 36 years. Likewise, the FOMC median in March was for unemployment to fall to 4.5 percent at the end of 2021, and now it seems possible that it may fall even further. With the economy continuing to reopen, I expect the pace of job creation to remain unusually strong over the spring and summer. Over the past few months many schools have resumed some form of in-person learning, which should translate into a rebound in labor force participation as more parents overseeing virtual education and child care are able to increase hours or return to the workforce. The biggest risk to the outlook continues to be the course of the pandemic. I see good reasons to be optimistic. Vaccinations are proceeding at a rapid pace, and this progress is supporting decisions by state and local leaders to relax economic restrictions. Most importantly, deaths related to the virus have continued to fall steadily and are at roughly the rate as in early October of last year. I remain hopeful that progress in the economic recovery can stay ahead of new challenges that might emerge, like the spread of new virus variants. That would allow states and localities to continue easing economic and social distancing restrictions and encourage consumers and businesses to return to normal activities. I understand that in Colorado, for example, officials are considering lifting social-distancing restrictions on individuals and businesses. I would be interested to hear from this group about how businesses in Colorado have been faring and whether they have seen an improvement in demand as the pandemic conditions are easing. While Iamoptimistic about the ongoing recovery, one lesson of the past year is the significant degree of uncertainty about the course of the virus and its effect on the economy. We experienced periods of considerable progress last year, but we saw some of that progress overtaken by waves of the infection late in the year. Likewise, economic growth rebounded much more quickly than many had expected, but then slowed late in 2020 before regaining speed following the availability of the vaccine. Even with recent encouraging reports on food services, activity in the travel, leisure, and hospitality sectors is still severely compromised, but is showing glimmers of activity. It may be some time before we know whether old habits will resume or new habits have developed that may define a post-pandemic new normal. As I noted in a recent speech, I am particularly concerned about the longer-term effect on small businesses, many of which have held on with government aid and loan forbearance programs that will soon expire.1It will be several months before we know the final count of permanent small business closures from 2020, but it could be more than we expect. I will now turn to how the Federal Reserve is proceeding in light of the strong signals of momentum building in the economy. The economic recovery is not yet complete, and the uncertain course of the pandemic still presents risks in the near term, which is why my colleagues and I on the FOMC decided last week to maintain our highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. Despite the progress to date and the signs of acceleration in the recovery, employment is still considerably short of where it was when the pandemic disrupted the economy and it is well below where it should be, considering the pre-pandemic trend. In particular, our maximum employment mandate is intended as a broad and inclusive goal increasing employment and opportunity, but I remain concerned that employment gains for some minority groups have lagged behind those of others. While job creation has been and is expected to remain strong, the pace will eventually slow as the share of those who have been unemployed for the longer-term increases among those who are looking for work. We are making good progress toward our full employment goal, but we still have a long way to go, and risks remain. This brings me to the other side of our policy mandate. Over the next several months, I expect that headline inflation measures will move above our long-run target of 2 percent. A main reason I expect this outcome is simply the fact that the very low inflation readings during last spring's deep economic contraction will drop from the usual calculation of 12-month price changes. But in addition, the unusually rapid rebound in economic activity that we've seen, along with the pandemic-driven shift towards goods purchases, has led to supply-chain bottlenecks in a number of areas, which in turn have pushed up prices for many goods. One prominent example is with semiconductor producers and their need to dramatically alter the mix of production to meet demands of the high-tech and automotive industries. Although I expect these upward price pressures to ease after the temporary supply bottlenecks are resolved, the exact timing of that dynamic is uncertain. If the supply bottlenecks prove to be more long-lasting than currently expected, I will adjust my views on the inflation outlook accordingly. At this point, the risk that inflation remains persistently above our long-run target of 2 percent still appears small. In summary, let me say that I am encouraged by the recent pace of the economic recovery, and I remain optimistic that this strength will continue in the coming months. One reason for my optimism is that businesses have been effective in responding to the challenges posed by the pandemic and by economic restrictions implemented in efforts to contain it. We really can't know how the pandemic will proceed and how that will affect the U.S. economy, but I think we are currently on a good path, and our policy is in a good place. Thank you again for inviting me to speak to you today, and I would be happy to respond to your questions. 1. See Michelle W. Bowman (2021), "The Economic Outlook and Prospects for Small Business," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (via webcast), March 22.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At The Global Interdependence Center's 39th Annual Monetary and Trade Conference, The LeBow College of Business, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (via webcast) Thank you, Kathleen, and thank you, George and the Global Interdependence Center, for the invitation to speak to you this afternoon. I am with you to talk about my outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for monetary policy.1In the last week we have received employment and inflation reports that have garnered a lot of attention. Incorporating this information into my outlook, I have two messages today. The first is that, despite an unexpectedly weak jobs report, the U.S. economy is hitting the gas and continuing to make a very strong recovery from the severe COVID-19 recession. Let's remember, and this applies to latest inflation data too, that a month does not make a trend—the trend for the economy is excellent. My second message is that, despite the unexpectedly high CPI inflation report yesterday, the factors putting upward pressure on inflation are temporary, and an accommodative monetary policy continues to have an important role to play in supporting the recovery. The pandemic and resulting public health response led to the sharpest drop in employment and output the United States has likely ever experienced—22 million jobs lost in eight weeks and an annualized decline of 30 percent in real gross domestic output for the second quarter of 2020. These numbers are simply staggering, and they left us in a deep, deep hole. Not so long ago, it seemed like the economic damage from COVID-19 might be with us for a long time, and that a full recovery could take many years. But thanks to the rapid development of vaccines and aggressive fiscal and monetary policy, the economy is recovering much faster than anyone expected six months ago. I said a few weeks ago that the economy was ready to rip, and in many respects, that is exactly what it is doing. The initial estimate of first quarter real gross domestic product (GDP) growth came in at a 6.4 percent annual rate, surpassing the level of output in the first quarter of 2020, before the full force of COVID-19 hit the economy. Second-quarter growth is likely to be as much as 8 percent, and the prospects are good that GDP will be close to trend output by the end of 2021. New home sales continue to be strong. We are seeing robust household spending on durable goods despite supply bottlenecks that I will discuss in a moment. Surveys of purchasing managers point to continued solid growth in both manufacturing and business services. So, what about that jobs report? That thud you heard last Friday was the jaw of every forecaster hitting the floor. Itwasa big surprise for me and most people, but it probably should not have been, because it fits with what we have been hearing from businesses about labor supply shortages. GDP is back to its pre-pandemic level, but we have recovered only 14 million of the 22 million jobs lost last spring. To fully understand how the labor market is performing, I like to refer to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's labor market distribution spider chart.2The chart plots data for 15 different labor market indicators in an easy-to-read manner. Using this chart, you can compare all these indicators for February 2020, April 2020, and March 2021. Looking at these months allows one to compare the very healthy labor market of February 2020 with the depths of the pandemic decline in April 2020 and see both how well we have rebounded since then and how much farther we still have to go. The takeaway from that chart is that the labor market has recovered on many dimensions, such as hiring plans, job openings, quits rates, and firms unable to fill job openings. But on other dimensions, the labor market is far from recovering to its pre-pandemic level. Employment, as I said, is still below where it was in February 2020, by 8 million jobs. The unemployment rate is still 2.5 percentage points higher than it was in February 2020, and we know that it is even worse for some groups—nearly 10 percent for Black workers and nearly 8 percent for Hispanics. The employment-to-population ratio continues to be depressed from February 2020. The upshot is that several measures of labor market conditions have fully recovered, but other measures indicate that the overall labor market has a long way to go to get back to full strength. In short, some of the labor market's cylinders are firing away, and some are still sputtering, so monetary accommodation continues to be warranted. This chart, like the disappointing jobs report for April, shines a light on a current puzzle characterizing the U.S. labor market—a lot of job openings, but high unemployment rates and a low labor force participation rate. We hear repeatedly from our business contacts about firms boosting wages yet still being unable to attract workers.3While clearly this is a real problem for some firms at the moment, I believe this mismatch is temporary. I think of the current problem as follows. When the pandemic hit, both labor demand and labor supply fell dramatically. The combination of widespread vaccines and fiscal and monetary stimulus caused consumer demand to recover sharply. This situation, in turn, caused labor demand to rebound quickly, particularly in goods-producing industries. However, due to factors like continued fears of the virus, the enhanced unemployment insurance, child-care issues, and early retirements, labor supply has not rebounded in the same fashion, which led to a situation with excess demand for labor and upward pressure on wages.4And that is exactly what we saw in the April jobs report. Average hourly earnings rose 20 cents in April for private-sector nonsupervisory workers, to $25.45. But it is likely the labor supply shortage will be temporary. As vaccinations continue to climb, fears of reentering the labor force should decline. By September, most schools and daycare facilities are expected to fully reopen, resolving recent child-care issues for many families. Finally, the enhanced unemployment benefits passed in response to the pandemic expire in September, and research has shown repeatedly that the job-finding rate spikes as unemployment benefits run out.5Thus, while labor demand is currently outrunning labor supply, supply should catch up soon. Now let me turn to the other leg of the Fed's dual mandate, price stability. That second thud you heard yesterday was forecasters' bodies following their jaws to the floor after the CPI report was released. It was a surprise, but a look at its causes doesn't alter my fundamental outlook, which is that the main pressures on inflation are temporary. First, let me address concerns that strong growth threatens to unleash an undesired escalation in inflation. In August 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) adopted a new policy framework that includes flexible average inflation targeting and a policy stance based on economicoutcomesas opposed to economicforecasts. Flexible average inflation targeting means we aim to have inflation overshoot our 2 percent longer-run goal if inflation had been running persistently below target. Given that we missed our inflation target on the low side consistently for the past eight years or so, the FOMC has said that it will aim to moderately overshoot its inflation target for some period but then have it return to target. Our willingness to aim for above-target inflation also means we will not overreact to temporary overshoots of inflation—we need to see inflation overshoot our target for some time before we will react. An outcomes-based policy stance means that we must see inflation before we adjust policy—we will not adjust based on forecasts of unacceptably high inflation as we did in the past. Call this the "Doubting Thomas" approach to monetary policy—we will believe it when we see it. We asked to see it, and lo and behold, we are now starting to see inflation exceeding our inflation target. But the critical question is: for how long? Although inflation is starting to exceed our 2 percent target, in my view, this development is largely due to a set of transitory factors that are occurring all at once. I can think of at least six. First, there is what we economists call "base effects," which is the simple arithmetic of what happens when the very low inflation readings of the first half of 2020 fall out of our 12-month measure of inflation. That adjustment will be over in a few months. A second temporary factor is higher energy prices, which have rebounded this year as the economy strengthens but are expected to level off later this year. Retail gasoline prices have jumped in some areas due to the disruption of the Colonial Pipeline, but the effect on inflation should be temporary also. A third factor is the significant fiscal stimulus to date. Stimulus checks put money in people's pockets, and when they spend it, there will be upward pressure on prices. But when the checks are gone, the upward pressure on prices will ease. A fourth factor is a reversal of the very high savings that households have built up over the past year. As households draw down these savings, demand for goods and services will increase, which again will put upward pressure on prices. But, just like stimulus checks, once the excess savings is gone, it is gone, and any price pressures from this factor will ease. A fifth factor is supply bottlenecks that manufacturers and importers are currently experiencing; supply chain constraints are boosting prices, particularly for goods—less so for services. One strength of a capitalist system is that markets adjust. If demand and prices rise for a product, supply will follow, and bottlenecks will dissipate. So once again, price pressures induced by bottlenecks should reverse as supply chains catch up and orders get filled. Finally, the excess demand for labor I described earlier is likely to continue to push wages up in the next couple of months. How much of this increase gets passed through to prices is unknown, but some of it will. However, as I argued earlier, once labor supply catches up, this wage pressure should ease. I expect that all of these factors will cause inflation to overshoot our 2 percent longer-run goal in 2021. But they will not lead to sustained, high rates of inflation. Financial markets seem to think the same—5-year breakeven inflation expectations are around 2.5 percent, and 5-year, 5-year-forward measures are around 2 percent, when adjusted for the difference between CPI (consumer price index) and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation rates.6Hence, markets do not believe the current factors pushing up inflation will last for long. While I fully expect the price pressure associated with these factors to ease and for some of the large increases in prices to reverse, it may take a while to do so. Shortages give producers pricing power that they will be reluctant to let go of right away. Wage increases for new workers may cause firms to raise wages for existing workers in order to keep them. Consequently, there may be knock-on effects from the current wage increases. The pandemic has also caused firms to restructure their supply chains, and, as a result, bottlenecks may last longer than currently anticipated as these supply chains are rebuilt. There are also asymmetric price effects from cost shocks—prices go up very quickly but often tend to come down more slowly, as consumers slowly learn that the bottlenecks have gone away. For these reasons, I expect that inflation will exceed 2 percent this year and next year. After that, it should return to target. And in my view, this fluctuation is okay—our new framework is designed to tolerate a moderate overshoot of inflation for some time as long as longer-term inflation expectations remain well-anchored at 2 percent. Before I turn to the implications of all this for monetary policy, a word about the housing market. As I said earlier, housing is a bright spot in the economy that is encouraging investment and lifting household wealth, which is all good, but with memories of recent history in mind, the fast growth in housing prices in most areas of the United States does bear close watching. Housing is becoming less affordable, and that price increase has the biggest effect on low-income individuals and families who have struggled the most since last spring and who are always the most vulnerable to rising rents and home prices. Prices for lumber and other inputs for housing are skyrocketing, and while that occurrence is not having a significant effect on inflation, it is limiting the supply of new homes and helping feed the house price boom. Fortunately, the banking system is strong and resilient—going through multiple Fed stress tests and a tough, real-life stress test this past year. Nevertheless, I am watching this sector closely for signs of stress and will continue to do so. So, in summary, the economy is ripping, it is going gangbusters—pick your favorite metaphor. But we need to remember that it is coming out of a deep hole, and we are just getting back to where we were pre-pandemic. Labor market indicators are more mixed with 8 million workers still without jobs. But many of the problems holding back labor supply will dissipate over time, and we should return to the robust labor market we had in February 2020. Inflation is currently being driven above our 2 percent inflation target but is expected to return to target in subsequent years as transitory inflation shocks fade. Highly accommodative monetary policy, in conjunction with unprecedented fiscal support, has supported a rapid recovery from a uniquely sharp, pandemic-caused recession. The improving economy is helping repair the significant economic damage suffered by individuals, families, and businesses, but there is still a way to go before we fully recover. In light of that fact, I expect the FOMC to maintain an accommodative policy for some time. We have said our policy actions are outcome based, which means we need to see more data confirming the economy has made substantial further progress before we adjust our policy stance, because sometimes the data does not conform to expectations, as we saw last Friday. The May and June jobs report may reveal that April was an outlier, but we need to see that first before we start thinking about adjusting our policy stance. We also need to see if the unusually high price pressures we saw in the April CPI report will persist in the months ahead. The takeaway is that we need to see several more months of data before we get a clear picture of whether we have made substantial progress towards our dual mandate goals. Now is the time we need to be patient, steely-eyed central bankers, and not be head-faked by temporary data surprises. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you, and I would be happy to respond to your questions. 1. I am grateful to John Maggs and Jane Ihrig for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2021), "Labor Market Distributions Spider Chart," updated May 7, available athttps://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/labor-market-distributions.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), Beige Book,National Summary(Washington: Board of Governors, March 3). As indicated in paragraph 2 of that document, "labor supply shortages were noted by contacts as most acute among low-skill occupations and skilled trade positions. Constraints on labor supply included those related to COVID-19, childcare, and unemployment benefits."Return to text 4. According to the Federal Reserve's upcoming Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, in July 2020, 22 percent of parents reported they were not working or working less because of childcare or schooling disruptions. Those numbers were 36 percent for Black mothers and 30 percent for Hispanic mothers. See Jerome H. Powell (2021), "Community Development," speech delivered at the "2021 Just Economy Conference," sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington (via webcast), May 3.Return to text 5. For example see Ioana Marinescu and Daphné Skandalis "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Behavior", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 136, Issue 2, May 2021, Pages 887–931,Return to text 6. Breakeven inflation expectations are derived from Treasury constant-maturity securities and comparable Treasury inflation-indexed constant-maturity securities, otherwise known as TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities). The latest values imply what market participants expect inflation to be over the stated period on average. They are based on CPI inflation, whereas the preferred inflation measure for the FOMC is PCE inflation, which tends to run 0.3 percentage point below CPI on average.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Thank you, David, and thank you to Brookings and the Hutchins Center for the opportunity to lead things off and be part of this very distinguished panel. Today, I will explain why I expect the U.S. economy to continue growing strongly over the remainder of this year and what the implications of that outlook are for monetary policy.1 After the shutdowns and other measures taken in response to the COVID-19 outbreak last spring caused the swiftest and deepest recession in U.S. history, the economy has made a powerful recovery. Households and businesses adapted, supported by the flexibility and inherent strength of our market-based economy, by the continued resilience of our banking system, and by significant fiscal and monetary policy support. Highly accommodative monetary policy by the Federal Reserve has fostered strong growth in interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy such as housing and durable goods, offsetting some of the historic weakness in the service sector last year. With the service sector reopening while other household and business spending remains strong, I expect rapid growth to continue for some time before slowing to a still robust pace next year. Inflation is running significantly above the Federal Reserve's longer-run goal of 2 percent primarily as a result of three factors: the surge in demand as more services come back on line while goods spending remains robust, the emergence of bottlenecks in some supply chains, and the very low inflation readings recorded last spring dropping out of the calculation of 12-month inflation. For reasons I will detail in a moment, I expect that a significant portion of that recent boost to inflation will be transitory, and that it will not interfere with the rapid growth driving progress toward the Fed's maximum-employment goal. We've come a long way since last spring, but reopenings over the past year have been uneven, so it will still be some time before we repair all the economic damage. Supply bottlenecks will likely hinder the quick expansion of production in some industries in the next few months and raise some costs—in some cases significantly. The progress in reopening has been slower in countries that are among our largest trading partners, weighing on U.S. growth by reducing demand for U.S. exports. But even with those impediments, I believe the strong recovery will keep rolling forward. Let me walk through the evidence for that optimistic view. First, I see increasing recognition by the private and public sectors that a broad reopening can proceed safely.iThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has dropped most social-distancing recommendations for vaccinated people.2Although local COVID-19 restrictions on schooling and economic activity continue in some areas, most schools are teaching in person at least part time and more than half of states have dropped all capacity constraints on restaurants, bars, and retail establishments. More than a dozen more states are planning to do so over the coming weeks. With these reopenings, consumer spending, which is two-thirds of gross domestic product (GDP), will remain robust, supported by personal income that has, thanks to significant fiscal support, now surpassed the trend it was on before the COVID event. April's retail sales results were flat, but that came after enormous gains in March that were boosted by the latest round of stimulus checks. Looking beyond the headline numbers, sales were up 13 percent in March and 3 percent in April at restaurants and bars, one of the sectors hardest hit by the COVID-19 event. April and March were the third- and fourth-best months for vehicle sales to consumers in U.S. history, if you filter out sales to car rental companies, a sector just beginning to recover. You might expect this bounce will subside after consumption regains the strong trend it was on pre-COVID-19, but one reason I think it will continue is the still high rate at which people have been adding to their savings. Even as personal consumption expenditures rose at a huge 10 percent annual rate in the first quarter of 2021, the saving rate averaged 21 percent over those three months. Again, a lot of that reflected the most recent round of stimulus payments, but as employment grows and people return to normal life and work, the accumulated stock of savings will support spending for many months to come. Business investment took a big hit in the first half of 2020 but has come back strongly and is now running above pre-pandemic levels. Current indicators of business spending are pointing to continued elevated levels of investment in the months ahead. Supply bottlenecks have depleted inventories for many goods and rebuilding those inventories will be an important supplement for business spending and factory output. I see two potential headwinds for the economy: the uneven global recovery and the aforementioned supply bottlenecks. Strong U.S. demand is boosting imports, but weaker demand outside the United States, where recovery is slower, is restraining exports, and that problem may not resolve for some time. Supply bottlenecks are more prevalent now, especially in the auto and housing industries, with shortages of inputs leading to slower production that reduces employment growth. Although I expect employment to rise significantly in coming months, the picture is more mixed for the labor market than it is for spending. The unemployment rate remains at 6.1 percent, compared with 3.5 percent pre-COVID-19, and there are 8 million fewer jobs. Despite recent gains amid reopenings, employment in the travel, leisure, and food services sectors remains well below pre-pandemic levels. My optimism here reflects the apparent recovery in overall labor demand—by many metrics, job openings are above 2019 levels, including for workers without a college degree, a group especially affected last year. In the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey data for March, private-sector job openings as a percentage of total employment increased to 5.6 percent, which is above the previous record for that series set in November 2018. Job growth of 266,000 in April was a disappointing slowdown from recent months, but good news lurked beneath the headlines: For those who were working, average hours increased; the number of people working part time because they couldn't find full-time jobs decreased significantly; and wage growth was very strong. The underlying strength in hours and wages lends support to widespread reports that worker shortages are impeding hiring. Labor force participation remains about 3‑1/2 million people lower than before COVID-19. Among the many factors driving this shortage, as indicated by the Federal Reserve's reportEconomic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2020,is parents who need to care for their children because of remote school and aftercare.3We have also seen a wave of retirements by older workers in the past year. And, although the evidence is mixed, we have received plenty of anecdotal reports about the influence of generous unemployment benefits and large cash payments on the willingness of workers to return to work. But those benefits are slated to expire over the summer, and I hope that a fuller reopening of schools in the fall will ease the pressure on parents. The spike in retirements may well moderate in a stronger economy, as we saw in the year or two before the pandemic. So, while labor shortages could weigh on job creation in coming months, I don't yet perceive this development as significantly slowing the U.S. economy beyond the next few months. Now let's turn to the other half of the Federal Reserve's economic goals, inflation. As I mentioned last week during congressional testimony, I agree with the widespread view among my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and most private forecasters that the recent rise in inflation to well above 2 percent is driven by temporary factors. I expect inflation to begin subsiding at some point over the next several months and to be running close to 2 percent again at some point during 2022. Market-implied inflation expectations have risen only to the levels that prevailed in the early 2010s, after which inflation never ran consistently above 2 percent, and most survey measures are sending similar signals. Therefore, I consider these recent increases in inflation expectations a welcome development, reversing the large declines seen last spring and perhaps edging up in response to the message in the FOMC's new policy framework. That said, my optimistic outlook for growth and employment places me among those who see the risks to inflation over the medium term as weighted to the upside, relative to my baseline forecast. Broadly speaking, there are three reasons for this. First, there are wage pressures. A moment ago, I celebrated the upturn in wages in April, but it may be a sign that the torrid growth of the economy and labor supply shortages have begun pushing up wages faster than occurred with the moderate economic growth over much of the past decade. Wages are a large component of business costs that could pass through to prices more readily than increases in the cost of other inputs. It seems like a paradox that there could be labor supply problems and wage pressures at 6 percent unemployment, but it is also a fact. Some of this surprising outcome reflects temporarily lower labor force participation coming out of the enormous economic shock last spring, but some of the Fed's business contacts have said that shortages of skilled laborers—particularly in manufacturing, transportation, and construction—predated COVID-19 and are likely to persist. Another factor that I referred to earlier—fiscal policy—carries potential costs as well as obvious benefits. Even as the huge amount of stimulus money in people's pockets has been boosting income and spending in eye-popping ways, much of that stimulus was saved. A larger-than-expected or faster release of those accumulated savings while the economy is already growing rapidly could result in output exceeding potential output by more than it has in decades. It is reasonable to ask if the strength of spending stemming from this unprecedented fiscal stimulus will put significant upward pressure on inflation as households and businesses emerge further from the COVID event. But, at least to date, the latest round of stimulus seems to be supporting spending and growth without causing an inordinate rise in interest rates or inflation expectations. That outcome aligns with the advice of those in the economics profession who have produced research in recent years that leaves them much more comfortable with high deficits and debt, at least in countries with low interest rates, than they used to be.4In 2006, when I was serving as Under Secretary of the Treasury, we were subject to harsh criticism for running a deficit of not quite $250 billion, with total debt held by the public at 35 percent of GDP.5By contrast, in 2021, the deficit is currently projected to be $3.4 trillion, and total debt held by the public at the end of fiscal year 2020 was 100 percent of GDP.6 Further fiscal policy actions are, of course, the purview of the Congress and the Administration. History tells us that once the dreadnought of government spending gathers speed, it is difficult and slow to turn around. Surely the deficits being run to offset the COVID-related shocks have made it even more critical to address the sustainability of government debt in the years ahead. And, finally, recent monthly readings on import prices, producer prices, and consumer prices have all come in above consensus expectations. These upside surprises cannot be attributed to base effects. It is true that many of the factors driving the April consumer price index report and other inflation surprises continue to be supply bottlenecks, and it is reasonable to conclude that these will ease over time. But clearing some of those supply disruptions will require additional investment and the time to expand production capacity. If these shortages persist into 2022, people may adjust their expectations higher for future inflation, which could make above-target inflation more persistent than we currently expect. I don't want to overstate my concern—I am not worried about a return to the 1970s. We designed our new monetary policy framework for the very different world we live in now, which involves an equilibrium for the economy with slow workforce growth, lower potential growth, lower underlying inflation, and, therefore, lower interest rates. One of those differences is that the kinds of "wage-price spirals" that characterized inflation dynamics in the 1970s have not been present for a long time. It's quite possible that this situation now prevails because inflation is never high enough for long enough to enter decisionmaking in a material way. So, what are the implications for monetary policy? I am fully committed to the FOMC's new monetary policy framework and the two pieces of related guidance that we have put in place for asset purchases and the federal funds rate to implement that framework. The conditions required to change the pace of asset purchases and those required to increase the federal funds rate are sequential: The latter requires improvement in the economy that clears a much higher bar. Let me address each of those in turn. The guidance on asset purchases, introduced in December, commits us to increasing our holdings of securities at least at the current pace until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee's maximum-employment and price-stability goals. My personal view is that the rise in inflation—even after discounting temporary factors—and inflation expectations since December will prove sufficient to satisfy the standard for inflation in the guidance around asset purchases later this year, but improvement in the labor market has been slower than I would have liked. For instance, the unemployment rate has decreased only 0.6 percentage points to 6.1 percent, and the labor force participation rate is still nearly the same as it was at the time of the December meeting. Therefore, we need to remain patient in the face of what seem to be transitory shocks to prices and wages so long as inflation expectations continue to fluctuate around levels that are consistent with our longer-run inflation goal. For me, it is a question of risk management. The best analysis we currently have is that the rise in inflation to well above our target will be temporary. But those of us on the FOMC are economists and lawyers, not prophets, seers and revelators. We could be wrong; and what happens then? Part of the calculus in balancing the risks of either overshooting or undershooting our 2 percent goal is that the Fed has the tools to address inflation that runs too high, while it is more difficult to raise inflation that falls below target. If we're wrong, we know how to bring inflation down. But if our assessment is correct that inflation is temporary, it would be unwise for us to take actions that might slow the recovery prematurely by trying to stay ahead of inflation, when our best estimate is that we are not far behind. If my expectations about economic growth, employment, and inflation over the coming months are borne out, however, and especially if they come in stronger than I expect, then, as noted in the minutes of the last FOMC meeting, it will become important for the FOMC to begin discussing our plans to adjust the pace of asset purchases at upcoming meetings. In particular, we may need additional public communications about the conditions that constitute substantial further progress since December toward our broad and inclusive definition of maximum employment. This standard presents inherent communications challenges because it cannot be summarized by a single labor market indicator, such as the unemployment rate thresholds used in the Committee's interest rate forward guidance between late 2012 and late 2013. In contrast, the time for discussing a change in the federal funds rate remains in the future.iThe guidance for the federal funds rate commits to maintain the current rate until labor market conditions are consistent with our goal of maximum employment and inflation not only has reached 2 percent, but also is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In the FOMC's most recent Summary of Economic Projections, no participants—even those with optimistic growth forecasts such as I've outlined today—thought it appropriate that liftoff occur before 2022. Perhaps even more important than the timing of liftoff will be the expected trajectory of rate increases afterward, and you can see that even among participants with an earlier expected liftoff, those paths are quite shallow. Thus, I expect that monetary policy will remain highly accommodative for some time. Let me conclude with a few thoughts on financial stability. As the Fed's most recentFinancial Stability Reportnotes, the bright outlook, ample supply of credit, and accommodative fiscal and monetary policy have pushed some asset valuations to very high levels that could be subject to sharp reversals if expectations are not met. Likewise, business debt is high relative to past experience, which is a good reason to carefully weigh the risks. But the strong economy reassures me here: Earnings are growing, many businesses have ample stockpiles of cash, expected bond defaults are below their long-run medians, and the pace of credit rating downgrades has slowed to a trickle. When I think about financial stability, I think most directly about resilience to shocks, and it would be hard to imagine a better test of that resilience than what occurred in the spring of 2020. Banks met extraordinary demands for credit last spring from nonfinancial businesses and households while simultaneously providing forbearance on millions of existing loans and building substantial loss reserves, all without significant strains to their overall health. The largest banks at the core of the financial system are better capitalized than they have been in decades, and these institutions are sitting on large amounts of highly liquid assets while relying on relatively low levels of short-term funding. The banking sector is strong. I also see a resilient household sector. Household credit is primarily owed by borrowers with prime credit scores, rising home prices have most homeowners flush with equity, and, as I noted earlier, households are sitting on a large stock of savings. It is true that there are structural vulnerabilities in the nonbank financial sector, particularly money funds and hedge funds, and these are being scrutinized by U.S. and international authorities, including the Financial Stability Board under my chairmanship.7 But I believe these risks are manageable, and I come down on the side of the research that concludes these and other concerns are best addressed by targeted financial regulation and supervision rather than the blunt tool of monetary policy.8At a crucial moment in our recovery from the COVID-19 event, the utility of using monetary policy to try to address financial stability concerns would be greatly outweighed by the costs to employment and growth. Before ending, I'd like to reemphasize that I am quite optimistic about the path of the economy. While prices will run above our 2 percent target this year, I believe most of this increase will be transitory. After an exceedingly difficult year, we are poised to enter a robust and durable expansion. Thank you again for the invitation to be here today, and I look forward to our discussion. 1. All of my remarks today represent my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021),"Interim Public Health Recommendations for Fully Vaccinated People,"webpage.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),"Federal Reserve Board Issues Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households,"press release, May 17.Return to text 4. See Olivier Blanchard (2019), "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates,"American Economic Review,vol. 109 (April), pp. 1197–229; Lawrence H. Summers (2018), "Secular Stagnation and Macroeconomic Policy,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 66 (June),pp. 226–50; and Jason Furman and Lawrence Summers (2020), "A Reconsideration of Government Debt in an Era of Low Interest Rates," presentation to the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy and Peterson Institute for International Economics, December 1, https://www.piie.com/system/files/documents/furman-summers2020-12-01ppt.pdf.Return to text 5. For the deficit projection for 2021, see Congressional Budget Office (2021),The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031(Washington: CBO, March).Return to text 6. See Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (2021),"Federal Debt: Total Public Debt as Percent of Gross Domestic Product,"FRED Economic Data (accessed May 21).Return to text 7. See Department of the Treasury (2020),"President's Working Group on Financial Markets Releases Report on Money Market Funds,"press release, December 22; and Financial Stability Board (2020),Global Monitoring Report on Non-Bank Financial Intermediation 2020(Basel: FSB, December).Return to text 8. See, for example, Lars E.O. Svensson (2019),"The Relation between Monetary Policy and Financial-Stability Policy,"in Alvaro Aguirre, Markus Brunnermeier, and Diego Saravia, eds.,Monetary Policy and Financial Stability: Transmission Mechanisms and Policy Implications(Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile), pp. 283–310.Return to text i. Note: This speech was updated on May 26, 2021 to match remarks made at the Brookings Institution. On page 2, the sentence should read, "First, I see increasing recognition by the private and public sectors that a broad reopening can proceed safely." On page 10, the sentence should read, "In contrast, the time for discussing a change in the federal funds rate remains in the future."Return to text
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the "NABE International Symposium: A Vision of the Economy Post COVID," Washington, D.C. (via webcast) It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the National Association for Business Economics International Symposium: A Vision of the Economy Post COVID.1So much has happened since we last met in Washington in February 2020, but I am grateful that technology is allowing us to gather once again, if only virtually. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Ellen Zentner, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIn February 2020, none of us could have imagined that in a few short weeks the COVID-19 pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it would deliver the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed by more than 30 percent at an annual rate in the second quarter of 2020; more than 22 million jobs were lost, wiping out a decade of employment gains; the unemployment rate rose from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February to almost 15 percent in April; and inflation plummeted in response to a collapse in aggregate demand that dwarfed the contraction in aggregate supply. But with the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the economy has proven to be much more resilient than many forecast or feared one year ago. With timely support from monetary and fiscal policy—unprecedented in both scale and scope—and the rapid development and deployment of several effective vaccines, the economy stabilized and began a robust recovery in the second half of 2020 that both we and outside forecasters expect to pick up steam this year. So far, the economic activity data we have received this year is consistent with this outlook. For example, GDP rose by an impressive 6.4 percent in the first quarter, with real final sales to private domestic purchasers up an eye-popping 10.6 percent. Household spending on goods is rising robustly, and spending on services is also picking up as contact-intensive sectors begin to reopen and recover. Business and residential investment have more than fully recovered from the 2020 collapse and are operating above pre-pandemic levels. However, after looking at the details of Friday's disappointing employment report, the near-term outlook for the labor market appears to be more uncertain than the outlook for economic activity. Employment remains 8.2 million below its pre-pandemic peak, and the true unemployment rate adjusted for participation is closer to 8.9 percent than to 6.1 percent. At the recent pace of payroll gains—roughly 500,000 per month over the past three months—it would take until August 2022 to restore employment to its pre-pandemic level. But what this necessary rebalancing of labor supply and demand means for wage and price dynamics will depend importantly on the pace of recovery in labor force participation as well as the extent to which there are post-pandemic mismatches between labor demand and supply in specific sectors of the economy and how long any such imbalances persist. Readings on inflation on a year-over-year basis have recently increased and are likely to rise somewhat further before moderating later this year. Over the next few months, 12-month measures of inflation are expected to move above our 2 percent longer-run goal, largely reflecting, I believe, transitory factors such as a run of year-over-year comparisons with depressed service-sector prices recorded last spring as well as the emergence of some supply bottlenecks that may limit how quickly production can rebound in certain sectors. However, under my baseline outlook, these one-time increases in prices are likely to have only transitory effects on underlying inflation, and I expect inflation to return to—or perhaps run somewhat above—our 2 percent longer-run goal in 2022 and 2023. This outcome would be entirely consistent with the new framework the Federal Reserve unanimously adopted in August 2020 and began to implement at our September 2020 Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting.2 Recent FOMC Decisions and the New Monetary Policy FrameworkAt FOMC meetings convened since the new framework was announced last August, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases to bring it in line with our new framework. As announced in the September 2020 FOMC statement and reiterated in the following statements—including the most recent one—with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.3We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent, and until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, in our December 2020 FOMC statement, the Committee combined our forward guidance for the federal funds rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month untilsubstantial further progress,measured relative to the December 2020 announcement, has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "shortfalls[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations."4This language means that, going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate.5To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it will conduct policy to achieve inflation outcomes that keep long-run inflation expectations anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to a "flexible form of average inflation targeting."6While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—that remain unchanged.7 Concluding RemarksNotwithstanding the recent flow of encouraging macroeconomic data, the economy remains a long way from our goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our guidance for interest rates and asset purchases ties the path of the federal funds rate and the size of the balance sheet to our employment and inflation goals. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy for as long as it takes until the job is well and truly done. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The 2020 Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 3. The statements issued after the September 2020 and subsequent FOMC meetings are available, along with other postmeeting statements, on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 4. The most recent version of the 2012 statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_201901.pdf.Return to text 5. The Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—is a relevant indicator that this goal is being met. See Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020), "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2); and Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2021), "Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5).Return to text 6. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.Return to text 7. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.Return to text