The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation today announced the availability of the 2021 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies. These are geographic areas where revitalization or stabilization activities are eligible to receive Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) consideration under the community development definition. Distressed nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies and underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies are designated by the agencies in accordance with their CRA regulations. The criteria for designating these areas are available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) website (http://www.ffiec.gov/cra). The designations continue to reflect local economic conditions, including unemployment, poverty, and population changes. As with past releases, the agencies apply a one-year lag period for geographies that were listed in 2020 but are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current release. Revitalization or stabilization activities in these geographies are eligible to receive CRA consideration under the community development definition for 12 months after publication of the current list. The current and previous years' lists can be found on theFFIEC website, along with information about the data sources used to generate those lists. 2021 List of Distressed or Underserved Nonmetropolitan Middle-Income Geographies (PDF) Source Information and Methodology (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Policy Summit 2021: Pathways to Economic Resilience in our Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio (via prerecorded video) Thank you, Emily, and thank you to the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland for hosting this policy summit. I'd also like to thank the participants and attendees for taking part in these critical conversations. It's really a pleasure to be here with you to support the discussions of economic resiliency that will take place over the next several days. Considerations of what builds resilient communities are at the top of the list as we look back at the economic impact from the pandemic and look ahead, as we experience a recovery that we want to benefit everyone. I would also like to highlight that three of the sessions taking place over these next few days will provide an opportunity for all of you to convey your own perspectives on the economic recovery from the pandemic. We would like to hear directly from you about how you see the recovery progressing in your own communities, whether you see unique aspects to the way businesses and families in your communities experienced the downturn and ongoing recovery, and what opportunities or challenges you think may lie ahead as we all adjust to lasting changes in the economy following the pandemic. These discussions will be the first of several aimed at continuing theFed Listensinitiative that began in 2019 and was part of the Federal Reserve's broad review of its monetary policy framework. The initial purpose ofFed Listenswas to interact in a public setting with members of the public and community groups to hear about issues relating to our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. The insights gained from these conversations proved to be highly valuable. Even though our framework review concluded last year, we are continuing theFed Listensinitiative with a focus this year on the economic recovery from the pandemic. We expect these listening sessions will benefit the Federal Reserve's ongoing policymaking process, while also providing important insights from affected communities, and enhancing transparency and public accountability. With that in mind, let me briefly describe what I see as the current state of national economic conditions. As we continue to see progress toward the recovery, including the lifting of economic and social-distancing restrictions, the economy is growing at the fastest pace in decades. Economic output has likely surpassed its pre-pandemic peak, but even with this progress, there are over 10 million people still without jobs who are either actively looking for employment or have since left the labor force. Employment has been recovering rapidly in the sectors of the economy related to goods production and sales, but the services economy has been much slower to recover. Employment in the leisure and hospitality sectors is down by more than 3 million jobs since February of 2020.1 As the recovery in the labor market and spending on goods and services continues to gain momentum, we are seeing upward pressures on consumer prices. In recent months, inflation has risen to well over the Federal Reserve's longer-run goal of 2 percent. This rise has reflected, in part, the fact that inflation numbers at the onset of the pandemic were very low. As those low values drop out of the 12-month average of price changes, this measure of inflation has increased and will likely increase further. But there is more to the recent rise in inflation than just these measurement issues. The impressive upswing in economic activity has played an important role as it has led to a number of supply chain bottlenecks and put upward pressure on prices for many goods. These upward price pressures may ease as the bottlenecks are worked out,but it could take some time, and I will continue to monitor the situation closely and will adjust my outlook as needed. Post–COVID-19 economic outcomesWe know that economic downturns are hardest for lower-income people, those with less education, and some minority groups. I believe that government responses to the pandemic—the lockdowns, school closures, and economic restrictions on businesses—significantly widened differences by income, education, race, and gender, and those disparities have persisted during the recovery. For example, we know that those with a high school education or less were among the hardest hit in the downturn last spring, and I am concerned about those individuals falling behind. In 2020, 20 percent of prime-age adults with less than a bachelor's degree experienced a layoff, 8 percentage points higher than for those with at least a bachelor's degree.2 It seems that women, and especially minority women, have shouldered a larger share of adverse labor market impact because of limited child care options and the need to assist school-aged children with remote learning during the pandemic. The impact of COVID-19 has been especially hard for Black and Hispanic women in the workforce. Over 3.5 percent of Black and Hispanic women dropped out of the labor force altogether, compared with 1.7 percent of women overall.3 We also see divergent outcomes for small business owners across race and ethnicity. In the Federal Reserve's 2021 Small Business Credit Survey, 52 percent of Asian-owned, nonemployer small businesses reported their financial conditions as poor, compared with 38 percent of Hispanic-, 36 percent of Black-, and 28 percent of White-owned firms.4 The Federal Open Market Committee views the maximum level of employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. Thus, these gaps in employment and other measures of economic wellbeing can be interpreted to show that more progress is needed to reach maximum employment. The goal is to promote an economy in which all can contribute to and share in the benefits of economic growth. Community voicesWith the experiences of the pandemic fresh in our minds, an event like this policy summit offers insights and perspectives from a broad range of community voices about what is working on the ground. I find it especially rewarding and valuable to hear from groups like those attending this summit. Conversations with the leaders of community groups inform me and other Fed policymakers of community and consumer experiences in real time. Just last month, for example, the Board of Governors met with our Community Advisory Council (CAC). This council consists of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer and community development organizations and interests. In our conversation, they provided thoughtful insights about the recovery as it is evolving in communities across the country. Their perspectives touched on the disparities the pandemic has exacerbated and on the challenging road ahead. Perspectives on economic resilienceIn the time I have with you this morning, I'd like to offer my perspective on economic resilience. I often find striking similarities between urban and rural communities, just as the upcoming panel on the "common ground in urban and rural America" will explore. When it comes to building economic resilience, there are a few key elements that facilitate a quicker recovery across different kinds of communities after challenging times. There are a wide range of topics on this conference's agenda, from broadband access to workforce development to affordable housing to small business development—I will focus on just a few of these. One key element to community resiliency is the engagement of local financial institutions in providing access to credit and supporting small businesses with funding and technical assistance. As a former community banker, I know that few understand their communities better because they live in the local economy and can step in to lend in a targeted way to those best prepared to benefit. During the pandemic, community bankers and other lenders such as community development financial institutions (CDFIs) were the key to making sure that healthy businesses temporarily hurt by lockdowns, economic restrictions, and social distancing were able to access the multiple rounds of Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) funding that kept workers on their payrolls. In other ways, community banks once again showed how irreplaceable they were in responding to the needs of consumers and small business clients. While I have heard from community groups that small businesses struggled to navigate the PPP application process, especially those that did not have a preexisting banking relationship, community banks and CDFIs made a concerted effort to meet small business needs. The 2021 Small Business Credit Survey results showed that small banks were the most common source for PPP loans among employer firms, and applicants leveraging assistance from smaller banks were the most successful in obtaining all of the PPP funding they applied for.5Additionally, I heard from the CAC last month that CDFIs were also effective in lending to smaller borrowers with limited or no financial institution relationships. An environment that supports resilient small businesses means more jobs and economic growth in local communities—both urban and rural. In the past 10 years, small businesses created over 10 million net new jobs, or about two-thirds of net new job creation, overall. In rural counties, 65 percent of the total jobs, which is a significant majority, were provided through employment in a small business.6Creating and encouraging an environment that supports small business growth and entrepreneurship is a vital component of economic vitality and advancing a more broad-based recovery. This is exactly the type of environment that the Federal Reserve has been working to encourage with accommodative financial conditions promoting the flow of credit to households and small businesses. And finally, as all of us are acutely aware after more than a year of pandemic-related shutdowns, broadband access has become even more of an essential utility. It's something that families need for children attending virtual school online, for expanding work opportunities, and for remotely accessing goods and services. This essential service is often unavailable or considered a luxury in many rural and lower-income urban communities.Data from the Census Bureau show that only about 65 percent of households in both rural and lower-income counties pay to have a subscription to internet services, compared with the national average of about 80 percent.7 A report from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia also found income- and race-related gaps in both broadband availability and adoption rates across neighborhoods in Philadelphia.8Internet access has become necessary for those looking for a job, and, not surprisingly, the unemployment rate for those without a computer connected to the internet was about 3 percentage points higher than the unemployment rate for those with a computer with internet access.Investing in the infrastructure to increase broadband availability and to support broadband adoption in these communities could help close the employment gaps. Additionally, it can help level the playing field for children attending school, open opportunities for adults to pursue more stable and better-paying jobs and online education, and also enable access to online banking and other internet-based financial services. In summary, it seems clear that much progress remains to be made in these areas. The Federal Reserve is committed to supporting the economic recovery and will do so through our monetary policy tools, supervisory responsibilities, and community development function.I'm looking forward to seeing how the opportunities from your collaborations and the creative solutions arising from this summit will help support vulnerable communities in adapting to and recovering from economic shocks. Through this approach, and with partnerships among practitioners like those here today, we can ensure that those who experienced the greatest effects from the pandemic are included in the economic recovery. Thank you again for this opportunity to be here today, and I wish you a productive and successful conference. 1. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employment Situation Summary," news release, June 4, 2021.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2020 - May 2021 (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2021).Return to text 3. See "Civilian Labor Force Participation Rate," U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, June 4, 2021. The overall labor force participation rate dropped from 63.4 percent in January 2020 to 61.7 percent in April 2021.Return to text 4. The Small Business Credit Survey is a collaboration of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks and was fielded in September and October 2020. See Federal Reserve Banks,Small Business Credit Survey: 2021 Report on Firms Owned by People of Color(PDF)(Federal Reserve Banks, 2021). Nonemployer firms include the self-employed, freelancers, and independent contractors.Return to text 5. Federal Reserve Banks,Small Business Credit Survey.Return to text 6. See Hanna Love and Mike Powe, "Rural Small Businesses Need Local Solutions to Survive," Research Brief, Metropolitan Policy Program (Washington: Brookings Institution, December 2020).Return to text 7. See Michael J. Martin, "For the First Time, Census Bureau Data Show Impact of Geography, Income on Broadband Internet Access,"America Counts,December 6, 2018.Return to text 8. See Alvaro Sánchez,Toward Digital Inclusion: Broadband Access in the Third Federal Reserve District(Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, March 2020).Return to text
Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell will host a town hall with educators and students on August 17, 2021 at 1:30 p.m. EDT.* During the event, Chair Powell will respond to questions asked by participants who will join the event virtually from across the country. The event will be broadcast atfederalreserve.govand atyoutube.com/federalreserve. Viewers can follow the Federal Reserve Board on Twitter at@FederalReserve, on Facebook atfacebook.com/federalreserve, and join in on the discussion by using the hashtag: #FedTownHall. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. *Note: This release was revised on July 14, 2021 to reflect the event date change to August 17. Conversation with the Chair: A Virtual Teacher Town Hall Meeting
The Federal Open Market Committee on Friday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2022: January 25-26 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 15-16 (Tuesday-Wednesday) May 3-4 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 14-15 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 26-27 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 20-21 (Tuesday-Wednesday) November 1-2 (Tuesday-Wednesday) December 13-14 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 31-February 1, 2023 (Tuesday-Wednesday) For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday announced that it would continue itsFed Listensinitiative in 2021 to learn from a broad range of individuals, households, and communities about the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. "During the Federal Reserve's 2019 monetary policy framework review, theFed Listensseries of events provided valuable feedback from a broad range of groups and communities on the state of the economy and on issues related to our monetary policy goals," said Governor Michelle W. Bowman. "Continuing the initiative in years that we are not reviewing our framework will similarly benefit the Federal Reserve's ongoing policymaking process, while also enhancing transparency and public accountability." Details onFed Listensevents will be available atwww.federalreserve.gov/fedlistensas they are scheduled. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday announced the extension of its temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines with nine central banks through December 31, 2021. These arrangements were first announced onMarch 19, 2020to ease strains in global dollar funding markets resulting from the COVID-19 shock and to mitigate the effect of such strains on the supply of credit to households and businesses, both domestically and abroad. Extensions to the facility through March 2021 and later through September 2021 were announced onJuly 29, 2020andDecember 16, 2020, respectively. A further extension of the temporary swap lines will help sustain improvements in global U.S. dollar funding markets by serving as an important liquidity backstop. These swap lines allow the provision of U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts up to $60 billion each for the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Bank of Korea, the Banco de México, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, and the Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden) and $30 billion each for the Danmarks Nationalbank (Denmark), the Norges Bank (Norway), and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 by SVB Financial Group, Santa Clara, California, to merge with Boston Private Financial Holdings, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary state member bank, Boston Private Bank & Trust Company, both of Boston, Massachusetts. The Board also approved the proposals by Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, California, under section 18(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act to merge with Boston Private Bank & Trust Company, under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act to establish and operate branches at the locations of the main office and branches of Boston Private Bank & Trust Company, and under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act and section 208.3(d)(2) of the Board's Regulation H to change the general character of Silicon Valley Bank's business to engage in trust activities. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced it will extend for a final time its Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, or PPPLF, by an additional month to July 30, 2021. The extension is being made as an operational accommodation to allow additional processing time for banks, community development financial institutions, and other financial institutions to pledge to the facility any Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, loans approved by the Small Business Administration through the June 30 expiration of the PPP program. The PPPLF extends term credit to financial institutions making PPP loans, accepting the PPP loans as collateral. The liquidity provided by the PPPLF bolsters the effectiveness of the PPP by helping eligible financial institutions fund PPP loans. The PPPLF was established in April 2020 under the Board's 13(3) authority and the extension from June 30 to July 30, 2021, was approved by the Secretary of the Treasury. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility Term Sheet (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced plans to begin winding down the portfolio of the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF), a temporary emergency lending facility that closed on December 31st, 2020. The SMCCF proved vital in restoring market functioning last year, supporting the availability of credit for large employers, and bolstering employment through the COVID-19 pandemic. SMCCF portfolio sales will be gradual and orderly, and will aim to minimize the potential for any adverse impact on market functioning by taking into account daily liquidity and trading conditions for exchange traded funds and corporate bonds. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which manages the operations of the SMCCF, will announce additional details soon and before sales begin. The SMCCF was established with the approval of the Treasury Secretary and equity provided by the Treasury Department under the CARES Act. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Craco, Inc., Vinita, OklahomaWritten Agreement, dated November 13, 2020 (PDF)Terminated June 9, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: SunTrust Bank, Atlanta, GeorgiaConsent Order, dated November 19, 2019 (PDF)Terminated June 10, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday that results from its bank stress tests will be released on Thursday, June 24, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Stress tests help ensure that banks have adequate capital to absorb losses so that they can lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. For the 2021 stress tests, the resilience of large banks is being tested against a hypothetical recession featuring a severe global downturn with substantial stress in commercial real estate and corporate debt markets. Banks with more than $100 billion in total consolidated assets are subject to the Board's stress tests. The smaller banks among those subject to the Board's stress test are only required to participate every other year with all firms participating last year. For this year's test, four firms voluntarily opted-in: BMO Financial Corp., MUFG Americas Holdings Corporation, RBC US Group Holdings LLC, and Regions Financial Corporation. Additional information can be foundhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Tuesday that it will extend until August 11, 2021, the comment period for its proposed changes to Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing) that would clarify that debit card issuers should enable, and allow merchants to choose from, at least two unaffiliated networks for card-not-present debit card transactions, such as online purchases. The Board extended the comment period to allow interested persons more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. Originally, comments were due by July 12, 2021. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Notice of proposed rulemaking; extension of comment period (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday invited comment on a proposed rule to govern funds transfers over the Federal Reserve Banks' FedNow℠ Service. The FedNow Service is a new 24x7x365 service that will support instant payments in the United States and is expected to be available in 2023. The proposed rule would establish a new and comprehensive set of rules governing funds transfers over the FedNow Service and set out the legal rights and obligations of the Reserve Banks and FedNow Service participants. Many of the concepts in the proposed rule are similar to existing provisions that govern the Fedwire Funds Service, which is the payments service currently operated by the Federal Reserve System. Comments are due within 60 days of the proposal's publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Collection of Checks and Other Items by Federal Reserve Banks and Funds Transfers Through Fedwire Board Memo (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition against Jennifer BradfordFormer employee BBVA USA, Birmingham, AlabamaMisappropriation of customer and bank funds Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Tuesday the approval of a final rule amending Regulation D to eliminate references to an interest on required reserves (IORR) rate and to an interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate and replace them with a single interest on reserve balances (IORB) rate. The final rule also simplifies the formula used to calculate the amount of interest to be paid on such balances and makes other minor conforming amendments. The final rule adopts the rule proposed by the Board on January 8, 2021 without change, and takes effect on Thursday, July 29, 2021. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Regulation D: Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions Board Votes Interest on Reserve Balances Interest on Reserve Balances (IORB) Frequently Asked Questions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released the results of its annual bank stress tests, which showed that large banks continue to have strong capital levels and could continue lending to households and businesses during a severe recession. "Over the past year, the Federal Reserve has run three stress tests with several different hypothetical recessions and all have confirmed that the banking system is strongly positioned to support the ongoing recovery," said Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles. All 23 large banks tested remained well above their risk-based minimum capital requirements and as laid out previously by the Board, the additional restrictions put in place during the COVID event will end. All large banks will be subject to the normal restrictions of the Board's stress capital buffer, or SCB, framework. The SCB framework was finalized last year and maintains strong capital requirements in the aggregate for large banks with an increase in requirements for the largest and most complex banks. It sets capital requirements via the stress tests, and as a result, banks are required to hold enough capital to survive a severe recession. If a bank does not stay above its capital requirements, which include the SCB, it is subject to automatic restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. The Board's stress tests help ensure that large banks can support the economy during economic downturns. The tests evaluate the resilience of large banks by estimating their losses, revenue, and capital levels—which provide a cushion against losses—under hypothetical scenarios over nine future quarters. This year's hypothetical scenario includes a severe global recession with substantial stress in commercial real estate and corporate debt markets. The unemployment rate rises by 4 percentage points to a peak of 10-3/4 percent. Gross domestic product falls 4 percent from the fourth quarter of 2020 through the third quarter of 2022. And asset prices decline sharply, with a 55 percent decline in equity prices. Under that scenario, the 23 large banks would collectively lose more than $470 billion, with nearly $160 billion losses from commercial real estate and corporate loans. However, their capital ratios would decline to 10.6 percent, still more than double their minimum requirements. Also on Thursday, the Board corrected an error with the results for BNP Paribas USA from the June and December 2020 stress tests. As a result, the projected pre-provision net revenue, projected pre-tax net income, and projected capital ratios were corrected. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2021: Supervisory Stress Test Results (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board's offices in Washington, D.C., will be closed on Friday, June 18, 2021, in observance of Juneteenth National Independence Day. All previously scheduled announcements will be released today or postponed until Monday, June 21, with more information on theBoard's website. Federal Reserve Financial Services willoperate normallyon Friday, June 18, and Monday, June 21, providing payment services, including the fulfillment of orders for currency and coin, which is standard practice for any federal holiday that falls on a Saturday. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At The Prudential Regulation Conference (via webcast) As many of you know, I am speaking to you from Salt Lake City, which, among its myriad other virtues, was the home of one of the earliest passenger airlines—Western Air Express, which ran its first passenger flight in the spring of 1926: Eight hours in a Douglas M2 between Salt Lake City and Los Angeles, with one stop in Las Vegas for fuel. Two of the first passengers sat on the mail sacks in the back, and those early plane travelers were adventurers in other ways as well. That year there were 12 fatal commercial airplane crashes and that number rose to 59 a year by 1930. That's not total deaths—that's fatal crashes, with many people on each plane. Comparing hours flown and number of flights, that would be as if we had 7,000 fatal airplane crashes in a typical year today, with hundreds of thousands dead. But we did not have 7,000 fatal crashes last year. We had five in the entire world. The year before we had eight. Air travel is famously the safest way to get from point A to point B, as a result of decades of innovation in technology and operating processes. Importantly, however, even as the airline industry was improving safety, it was equally focused on improving efficiency—especially as we moved into the era of jet travel in the 1960s. The eight-hour trip between Salt Lake and Los Angeles now takes an hour and a half even counting all the nosing around on the ground (although an argument can be made that a typical coach seat may not be that much more comfortable than sitting on the mail bags). Yet average fuel burn has been falling every year since 1960 and continues at a strong pace—in the first decade of the 21st century, fuel efficiency on domestic flights increased by another 40 percent. The airlines recognized that the public has a strong interest in safety, but that it also has a strong interest in other values as well. A more efficient airline is easier on the environment, cheaper for the consumer, and a stronger contributor to the overall economy. And, obviously, these continuing improvements in operation have been achievable without any compromise in safety. I think you can see where I am going with this. In the aftermath of the Great Financial Crisis, the Federal Reserve, the international regulatory community, and the banking industry took action to radically improve the safety of the banking system: new capital and liquidity rules, new stress testing requirements, a new resolution framework. Together, these have greatly strengthened the safety of the financial system. Actual common equity capital ratios for large banks have roughly doubled since the crisis (and are at least six times as great as the pre-crisis requirements). But in implementing these safety requirements, we did not pay as close attention to efficiency. Yet the public interest in efficiency is also strong, so over the last four years we have comprehensively sought ways to improve the efficiency of the system while maintaining its safety—which is every bit as possible in the financial system as it has been for the airlines. While this has been a broad project, today I want to focus on four examples of measures that illustrate this phenomenon. These measures have enjoyed support across the political spectrum because they have brought measurable benefits to the American people. Tailoring RegulationThe first that I would cite is our broad work since 2018 on tailoring our bank regulatory framework. That year, a bipartisan majority in Congress passed the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), which made modifications to the Dodd-Frank Act and called on the banking agencies to further tailor regulation to better reflect the business models and activities of the different banking firms that we supervise. The legislation recognized that it is possible to keep the system just as safe while allowing the financial system more capacity to support the real economy and more flexibility in doing so. As I have said before, one of my goals as Vice Chair for Supervision has been to make our regulatory framework as simple, transparent, and efficient as possible. In particular, we must always ask whether the cost of regulation—whether in reduced economic growth or in increased frictions in the financial system—is outweighed by the benefits of the regulation. If we have a choice between two methods of equal effectiveness in achieving a goal, we should choose the one that is less burdensome for the system. This principle guided our activity in differentiating among firms based on their risk profile and applying tailored standards accordingly. In keeping with the intent of EGRRCPA, the Fed adopted a revised tailoring framework for the application of our enhanced standards to large firms. That framework rightly differentiates standards, including capital and liquidity requirements, based on the risk profile of an individual firm. Our previous framework relied heavily on a firm's total assets to determine the stringency of our regulatory requirements. However, the tailoring framework relies on a broader array of indicators—size, as well as measures of short-term wholesale funding, non-bank assets, off-balance sheet exposures, cross-jurisdictional activity—to better align our prudential standards with the risk of a firm. Under the tailoring framework, the most complex, systemically important firms are subject to the most stringent requirements, while less complex firms are subject to commensurately reduced requirements. This allows firms to focus resources more on their core lending function to support the real economy, which was certainly in evidence during the booming economy in the run-up to COVID. Our tailoring of regulation was not limited to just large banks. The banking agencies worked on a range of measures to better reflect the risk profile of smaller banking organizations. These include expanded eligibility for our small bank holding company policy statement, and an increased scope of banks eligible for longer examination cycles. Most prominently, we also adopted a simple measure of capital adequacy for qualifying community banks—the community bank leverage ratio. These measures also made our regulatory framework more efficient, tailoring the regulation of community banks to their risks. Another key change to improve the efficiency of our framework was the introduction of the stress capital buffer requirement, which integrated our stress testing and regulatory capital frameworks. The stress capital buffer requirement is a firm-specific capital requirement that is calibrated based on the results of the stress test and was designed to provide a through-the-cycle, unified approach to capital distribution restrictions. This change enhanced our framework by better differentiating between firms that posed the most systemic risk and other large banks. Additionally, this change contributed to simplifying our capital framework by reducing the number of capital requirements to which large banks are subject from 18 to 8 without reducing its resiliency—a material improvement in efficiency, and thus in the ability of banks to focus on service to customers rather than duplicative compliance Foreign BanksIn addition to tailoring regulation, we have tailored supervision. As an example, the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) portfolio was adjusted in scope so that it now encompasses all Category I firms, or U.S. GSIBs, and only those foreign banks with U.S. operations that would be identified for Category I standards if they were housed within a bank holding company. The adjustment resulted in certain foreign banks being moved out of the LISCC portfolio and into a separate supervisory portfolio with all other foreign banks along with domestic banks of similar sizes and risk profiles. The removal of these foreign banks from the LISCC portfolio reflects their significantly reduced risk profile and size in the United States—since 2008, the size of their combined U.S. assets has shrunk by about 50 percent and they have reduced the assets at their broker-dealers from a peak of $1.9 trillion in 2008 to $360 billion, a reduction of more than 80 percent. As a result of these substantial changes, it has clearly become appropriate to supervise the present-day U.S. operations of these foreign banks alongside domestic and foreign banks with a similar risk profile in our Large and Foreign Banking Organization (LFBO) portfolio. This means that these organizations will be horizontally assessed against other foreign banks. By grouping foreign banks together, this portfolio reassignment enhances the ability of supervisors to take into account, in a comprehensive fashion, of the structural features and specific risks associated with the cross-border character of foreign banking operations in the United States. It is obviously incorrect to say that this is "weaker" supervision: these banks are subject to the same capital and liquidity requirements that they were before and the supervisors in our LFBO portfolio are expert public servants. Indeed, this approach may be more effective in identifying risks unique to foreign banks. For example, the Archegos exposures in foreign banks outside the United States that resulted in recent losses outside the United States—losses that could not have been picked up by LISCC supervision—might have benefited from a supervisory structure that was more focused on foreign-bank-specific risks. The Countercyclical Capital BufferThe third example of a decision we have made to improve the ability of the banking system to provide support to a strong economy has been our treatment of the countercyclical capital buffer, or CCyB. Large banks are subject to a potential CCyB, which is a macroprudential tool that allows the Board to dynamically adjust capital levels of large banking firms when the risks to financial stability have meaningfully changed. There were many calls from outside the Fed for us to activate the CCyB in the years before the COVID event. It is clear now that those calls were mistaken. The Board's CCyB policy statement details the range of financial system vulnerabilities and other factors the Board may take into account as it evaluates settings for the buffer, including but not limited to, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. Our policy has been to maintain a 0 percent CCyB when vulnerabilities are within the normal range and, when they rise to a level meaningfully above normal, to increase the CCyB to a level that compensates for the rising vulnerabilities. As you no doubt have noticed, we did not increase the CCyB in the strong economy before the COVID event. That is because we have a consistent, disciplined, and comprehensive framework that lays out the proper factors to evaluate when deciding to turn the CCyB on or off, and the framework did not suggest vulnerabilities were particularly high. That framework has guided our decisions over the past few years and provided clear and transparent guidance to the public. The Federal Reserve should only turn on the CCyB in times of significant irrational exuberance; for example, in the face of a self-reinforcing cycle of borrowing and asset prices of the kind we saw in 2004–06. Yet, in my view, our through-the-cycle capital levels—that is, our fixed capital requirements—in the United States have been set so high, that our CCyB is effectively already "on." As a result, existing capital requirements for banks in the United States were already at a high enough level to maintain financial stability. When capital levels are sufficiently high, it would needlessly reduce the ability of firms to provide credit to their customers to turn on an additional capital requirement like the CCyB. Indeed, as I said at the time, the problem under our framework would instead be finding ways to turn down the CCyB thus embedded in our through-the-cycle capital requirements when the system was hit by a shock. Although the Fed had no formal CCyB to release when the COVID event struck, the U.S. banking system played a major role in taking deposits from, and extending credit to, households and businesses in 2020, and we did indeed have to take temporary measures to "turn down" our implied CCYB through limited exemptions to some of our capital requirements. The U.S. banking system performed very well in the COVID event compared to other jurisdictions that did have a CCyB that they released. The Volcker RuleFinally, a fourth example: changes to the implementation of the Volcker rule that have had the effect of providing greater ability for banks to support dynamism and innovation through venture capital funds, including incentives for banks to make investments in low-income areas, benefitting different groups, including minority entrepreneurs. Over the past four years, the agencies responsible for implementing the Volcker rule have broadly simplified the rule's compliance requirements. We have adhered to the intent of the rule while providing greater clarity and certainty for permissible activities. In particular, the most recent revisions opened up opportunities for banks to invest in the communities they serve through a variety of fund structures without running afoul of the Volcker rule restrictions. Our clarification of the definition of "covered funds" in the Volcker rule has allowed banks to make a broader range of fund investments that support communities, with the confidence that they are permissible. In passing the Community Reinvestment Act, Congress found that regulated financial institutions have a continuing obligation to help meet the credit needs of their local communities, so it is eminently sensible that the Volcker rule regulations allow banks to meet these important obligations.1 Other changes finalized last year allow banks to make investments in rural business investment companies and qualified opportunity funds. Rural business investment companies promote economic development and job creation in rural areas, while qualified opportunity funds support long-term investments in economically distressed communities. Together, these changes have given greater certainty to banks about what is permissible and what is not under the Volcker rule—a clear efficiency gain—while also allowing them to make a broader range of investments that support innovative growth and benefit local communities. The COVID EventThese are just a few examples of changes we have made over the last four years that have bettered the ability of the system to perform its function of providing credit to households and businesses. But have we been as successful as the airlines in making efficiency improvements while continuing to make the system safer? That proposition faced a significant test in the spring of 2020, with the arrival of COVID-19 and the severe effects that measures to contain it had on the economy and financial system. It allowed us to gauge not only the resilience of our regulatory framework but the effectiveness of our efforts over the last four years to ensure that our framework did not hamper banks' ability to perform their critical function to lend to households and businesses and serve as financial intermediaries. When the COVID event began last year, the magnitude of the economic and financial disruptions was staggering. Voluntary and mandated quarantines, lockdowns, and social distancing efforts hammered aggregate demand, caused unfathomably large job losses clustered in certain service sectors, and sharply increased uncertainty. Workplaces closed, travel was curtailed, and global supply chains were disrupted. Large sectors of the global economy, such as tourism and transportation, came to an abrupt stop. As concerns about the virus and measures to contain it spread, these effects grew. At the same time, certain critical financial markets seized up or ceased to function effectively. Short-term liquidity markets were strained as investors "dashed for cash," focusing on their own liquidity. The commercial paper market, where companies raise cash by issuing short-term debt, seized up to an extent similar to the fall of 2008. And as in the financial crisis, investors in certain prime and tax-exempt money market funds with immediate cash needs submitted redemption requests that resulted in significant outflows from these funds. Equity prices plunged and yields on corporate bonds widened significantly. Perhaps I can simply underscore the peril of the time by noting that the Treasury market—the lifeblood of the financial system—became highly dysfunctional, something that didn't even happen in 2008 or 2009. This was truly a massive global shock. As businesses closed and consumers stayed home, 22 million jobs were lost in scarcely two months. The unemployment rate soared from 3.5 percent in February 2020 to 14.8 percent in April 2020, well above the highest rates experienced in the United States since the Great Depression.2In addition to the immediate and apparent impact of the COVID event, there was also tremendous uncertainty regarding the path of future government responses. Macroeconomic experts, both at the Federal Reserve, and elsewhere, constructed many different plausible scenarios for how the economy would fare, and this was reflected in scenario-writing related to stress tests. Our June 2020 stress tests included a sensitivity analysis, designed in April 2020, that used three alternative downside scenarios that spanned the wide range of projections made at that time by professional forecasters. Those scenarios included peak unemployment rates ranging from 16 percent to 19.5 percent and assumed no additional fiscal measures to support the economy. So how did the bank regulatory system do? By any measure, quite well. Entering the COVID event, the banking system was fortified by over 10 years of work to improve safety and soundness, both by regulators and by banks themselves. Higher levels of capital and liquidity, better risk management, and more robust systems enabled the banking system to absorb an unprecedented shock—while providing refuge from market instability, delivering essential public aid, and working constructively to support borrowers and communities.In short, the full set of post-2008 reforms—as refined and recalibrated by the work of the last four years—ensured that this time would truly be different than the last. With respect to capital, banks actuallybuiltcapital during the COVID event, thanks to actions from regulators and their own voluntary actions, even despite setting aside close to $100 billion in loan loss reserves. The aggregate common equity tier 1 capital ratio for the banking system in the second half of 2020 materially exceeded its pre-COVID-event level. Capital ratios remain well above regulatory minimums for all firms. Banks also strengthenedtheir liquidity positions during the COVID event, primarily due to an influx of deposits and their reinvestment in reserves. The share of bank liquid assets as a share of total assets far exceeds the pre-COVID-event metric. Banks also served as a source of strength to the economy. With respect to lending, businesses were able to draw on pre-existing credit lines to meet the massive demands for cash. Banks of all sizes also funded the bulk of the more than $795 billion in Paycheck Protection Program loans. According to our weekly data, commercial and industrial loans increased $715 billion between the week of February 26th and their peak on May 13th. For millions of struggling households, interest and principal payments on loans were delayed. In addition, through May 2021, more than $2.2 trillion of central bank reserves and roughly $3.7 trillion of deposits had been absorbed by banks. Overall, the regulatory framework for banks constructed after the financial crisis, with the refinements and recalibrations we have made over the last few years, has held up well. The banking system remained strong and resilient, and banks served as a source of strength to the economy, and our stress tests indicated this would have been the case even without the substantial fiscal assistance provided to the rest of the economy. We have already learned many new lessons regarding our financial system during this experience. One lesson in particular I wanted to highlight is that our rigorous, forward-looking capital framework, which includes the stress capital buffer, works very effectively. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we required large banks to resubmit their capital plans and restricted their capital distributions. Those restrictions are slated to end following this quarter if large banks perform well on the upcoming stress test. While it was sensible at the time, given that this was the first real world test of our system, for us to use the belt and suspenders approach of additional, temporary capital distribution restrictions, we now know that we can have particular confidence in the stress capital buffer framework, as it is informed by a real-time stress testing regime. In the future, having learned the lessons of this test, we will be able to rely on the automatic restrictions of our carefully developed framework when the stress test tells us the system will be resilient, rather than using ad hoc and roughly improvised limitations.3 We cannot say, however, that the entirety of the financial system performed well, even parts that were subject to reforms following the financial crisis. As I have mentioned previously, the run on prime money funds and commercial paper were particularly concerning, as they resembled the runs faced during the financial crisis, despite subsequent reforms to those markets. The government had to step in yet again to stem the outflows from the prime money funds to stabilize financial markets. Addressing the shortcomings we saw among non-banks continues to be a focus of both domestic policymakers and the international community, particularly under my chairmanship of the Financial Stability Board. We cannot afford to allow the same things to happen again. In the end, our banking system performed well over the challenges of the last year. U.S. banks remain in good condition. First-quarter data showed that aggregate capital ratios increased, and banks continued to maintain ample levels of liquidity. We must, of course, remain vigilant in safeguarding our banking system. New threats can, and will, emerge. In a few weeks, we will learn the results of our annual stress test and will publicly release an update on the health of large banks, evaluating their balance sheets against a quite severe hypothetical recession. The COVID event did, however, serve to reinforce that the safeguards we have built and maintained since the financial crisis have passed the strictest stress test of all. 1. 12 U.S.C. 2901(a)(3).Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Monetary Policy Report – February 2021(Washington: Board of Governors, February 2021).Return to text 3. The stress capital buffer requirement imposes increasingly strict automatic limits on capital distributions as a firm's capital ratios decline toward the minimum requirements, and if a firm were to be within its buffer would be more stringent than the restrictions the Board imposed over the last year.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the 113th Annual Utah Bankers Association Convention, Sun Valley, Idaho I have been reflecting recently, and in connection with this speech, on America's centuries-long enthusiasm for novelty. In the main, it has served us and the world well, by making America the home of so many of the scientific and practical innovations that have transformed life in the 21st century from that of the 19th. But, especially when coupled with an equally American susceptibility to boosterism and the fear of missing out, it has also sometimes led to a mass suspension of our critical thinking and to occasionally impetuous, deluded crazes or fads. Sometimes the consequences are in hindsight merely puzzling or embarrassing, like that year in the 1980s when millions of Americans suddenly started wearing parachute pants. But the consequences can also be more serious. Which brings us to my topic today: central bank digital currencies, or CBDCs. In recent months, public interest in a "digital dollar" has reached fever pitch. A wide range of experts and commenters have suggested that the Federal Reserve should issue—and in fact mayneedto issue—a CBDC. But before we get carried away with the novelty, I think we need to subject the promises of a CBDC to a careful critical analysis. In offering my views on this and other issues related to CBDCs, I am speaking for myself as a member of the Board of Governors, and not for the Board itself or any other Fed policymakers. And, indeed, you will all have seen Chair Powell's recent announcement that we are preparing a comprehensive discussion paper on this issue that will be the first step in a thorough public process to conduct just this sort of critical analysis, which I do not want to prejudge. But I do want to give some sense of the issues I think we will need to grapple with in this process, how I will be thinking about them, and the high bar that I think any proposal to create a U.S. CBDC must clear. So, let's begin with a basic question: what problem would a CBDC solve? To answer, we first need to define the term CBDC and assess the current state of the U.S. payment system. What Do We Mean by "CBDC"?The Bank for International Settlements has defined a CBDC as "a digital payment instrument, denominated in the national unit of account, that is a direct liability of the central bank."1 My first observation is that the general publicalreadytransacts mostly in digital dollars—by sending and receiving electronic balances in our commercial bank accounts. These digital dollars are not a CBDC, because they are liabilities of commercial banks rather than the Federal Reserve. Importantly, however, digital dollars at commercial banks are federally insured up to $250,000, which means that for deposits up to that amount—which means for essentially all retail deposits in the United States—they are as sound as a central bank liability. The Federal Reserve also provides digital dollars directly to commercial banks and certain other financial institutions. Federal law allows these financial institutions to maintain accounts with—and receive payments services from—the Federal Reserve. Balances in Federal Reserve accounts serve a vital financial stability function by providing a safe and liquid settlement asset for the U.S. economy. To summarize then, the dollar is already highly digitized. The Federal Reserve provides a digital dollar to commercial banks, and commercial banks provide digital dollars and other financial services to consumers and businesses. This arrangement serves the nation and the economy well: the Federal Reserve functions in the public interest by promoting the health of the U.S. economy and the stability of the broader financial system, while commercial banks compete to attract and effectively serve customers. So, given the existing digitization of the U.S. dollar, how would a CBDC differ from the digital dollars we use today? The key distinction is that, when most commentators speculate about a Federal Reserve CBDC, they assume that it would be available to the general public directly from the central bank. A CBDC of this nature could take different forms. One is an account-based model, in which the Federal Reserve would provide individual accounts directly to the general public. Like the accounts that the Federal Reserve currently provides to financial institutions, an accountholder would send and receive funds by debit or credit to their Federal Reserve account. A different CBDC model could involve a CBDC that is not maintained in Federal Reserve accounts. This form of CBDC would be closer to a digital equivalent of cash. Like cash, it would represent a claim against the Federal Reserve, but it could potentially be transferred from person to person (like a banknote) or through intermediaries. I am skeptical that the Federal Reserve has legal authority to pursue either of these CBDC models without legislation. Nevertheless, the recent clamor over CBDCs makes it appropriate to explore the benefits, costs, and practicalities of implementing one in the United States if such legislative authority were granted. Let's start with a look at the current U.S. payment system that a Fed CBDC would fit into. Current State of the U.S. Payment SystemThe Federal Reserve and private-sector interbank payment services already offer an array of options that facilitate efficient, electronic U.S. dollar payments. A few statistics related to the main large-value payment systems for U.S. dollars are illustrative. The Federal Reserve's large-value payment service (the Fedwire Funds Service) processes nearly $4 trillion in paymentsevery day.2These payments settle instantly in a bank's account at the Federal Reserve. A private-sector entity (The Clearing House) operates a large-value payment system that settles nearly $2 trillion in payments every day.3These payments do not settle in Federal Reserve accounts, but they are underpinned by balances on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank. Smaller-value payments often settle more slowly than large-value payments, but a variety of efforts to speed up settlement have been completed or are underway. For example, The Clearing House has developed an instant payments service that focuses on smaller-value payments. Similarly, the automated clearinghouse (or ACH) network—a batch-based payment network that first developed in the long-ago 20th century—now enables same-day settlement of ACH payments. And the Federal Reserve is developing an instant payment service—FedNow℠—that will soon provide recipients of small-value payments with immediate access to their funds in commercial bank accounts. The payment system is not perfect—some types of payments should move more quickly and efficiently. Payments across international borders, for example, remain a key area of concern because they often involve high costs, low speed, and insufficient transparency. The Financial Stability Board, an international group that I chair, produced a roadmap last year that is intended to address these concerns.4Additionally, private-sector stablecoins (which I will discuss in more detail in a moment) may facilitate faster and cheaper cross-border payments. In addition, some types of payments have not fully digitized or are subject to ongoing contention between businesses with competing economic interests. For example, paper checks remain widely used for certain types of payments (although the interbank check collection process is now almost entirely electronic).5Debit and credit card payments offer a convenient digital platform for consumers and retailers, but there has been considerable controversy between banks and retailers over who will capture the economics surrounding the fees associated with card transactions. Finally, many more Americans could benefit from digital payments by increasing their use of banking services, which can be promoted by wider use of low-cost, basic bank accounts. In summary, the U.S. payment system is very good, and although it is not perfect, work is already underway to significantly improve it. Policy ConsiderationsYet, proponents of a Federal Reserve CBDC believe that it would solve a number of significant problems. They suggest, for example, that a Federal Reserve CBDC may be necessary to defend the critical role the U.S. dollar plays in the global economy. Others say that a CBDC would overcome longstanding economic inequalities in American society. As we begin our Fed analysis of these issues, I will have to be convinced that a CBDC is a particularly good tool to address either of these issues, about which I am skeptical, and I will especially have to be convinced that the potential benefits of developing a Federal Reserve CBDC outweigh the potential risks. Let's examine some of the arguments raised by CBDC supporters. The first argument is that the Federal Reserve should develop a CBDC to defend the U.S. dollar against threats that would be posed by foreign CBDCs, on the one hand, and the continued spread of private digital currencies, on the other. Taking the threat from foreign CBDC's first, this argument presumes that at least some foreign currencies—all of which are already highly digitized in our current international banking system in the same way the dollar is and yet which do not pose a significant challenge to the international role of the dollar—will suddenly pose a much greater challenge to the dollar if that digitization is accomplished through a direct central bank digital currency instead of through the current digital payments system. In this view, the U.S. dollar will lose its place in the global economy if the Federal Reserve does not offer a similar product. I think it's inevitable that, as the global economy and financial system continue to evolve, some foreign currencies (including some foreign CBDCs) will be used more in international transactions than they currently are. It seems unlikely, however, that the dollar's status as a global reserve currency, or the dollar's role as the dominant currency in international financial transactions, will be threatened by a foreign CBDC. The dollar's role in the global economy rests on a number of foundations, including the strength and size of the U.S. economy; extensive trade linkages between the United States and the rest of the world; deep financial markets, including for U.S. Treasury securities; the stable value of the dollar over time; the ease of converting U.S. dollars into foreign currencies; the rule of law and strong property rights in the United States; and last but not least, credible U.S. monetary policy. None of these are likely to be threatened by a foreign currency, and certainly not because that foreign currency is a CBDC. CBDC supporters also suggest that private digital currencies pose a threat to the U.S. dollar. Private digital currencies come in multiple flavors, but for this purpose I will divide them into two categories: stablecoins and non-stablecoins, or cryptoassets, such as bitcoin. Let's begin with stablecoins. The value of a stablecoin is tied to one or more other assets, such as a sovereign currency.6There are multiple existing and potential stablecoins that are or would be tied in value to the U.S. dollar. Some commentators argue that the United States must develop a CBDC to compete with U.S. dollar stablecoins. Stablecoins are an important development that raise difficult questions. For example, how would widespread adoption of stablecoins affect monetary policy or financial stability? How might stablecoins affect the commercial banking system? Do stablecoins represent a fundamental threat to the government's role in money creation? In my judgment, we do not need to fear stablecoins. The Federal Reserve has traditionally supported responsible private-sector innovation. Consistent with this tradition, I believe that we must take strong account of the potential benefits of stablecoins, including the possibility that a U.S. dollar stablecoin mightsupportthe role of the dollar in the global economy. For example, a global U.S. dollar stablecoin network could encourage use of the dollar by making cross-border payments faster and cheaper, and it potentially could be deployed much faster and with fewer downsides than a CBDC. And the concern that stablecoins represent the unprecedented creation of private money and thus challenge our monetary sovereignty is puzzling, given that our existing system involves—indeed depends on—private firms creating money every day. We do have a legitimate and strong regulatory interest in how stablecoins are constructed and managed, particularly with respect to financial stability concerns: the pool of assets that acts as the anchor for a stablecoin's value could—if use of the stablecoin became widespread enough—create stability risk if it is invested in multiple currency denominations; if it is a fractional rather than full reserve; if the stablecoin holder does not have a clear claim on the underlying asset; or if the pool is invested in instruments other than the most liquid possible, principally central bank reserves and short-term sovereign bonds. All of these factors create "run risk" —the possibility that some triggering event could cause a large number of stablecoin holders to exchange their coins all at once for other assets and that the stablecoin system would not be able to meet such demands while maintaining a reasonably stable value. But these concerns are eminently addressable—indeed, some stablecoins have already been structured to address them. When our concerns have been addressed, we should be saying yes to these products, rather than straining to find ways to say no. Indeed, the combination of imminent improvements in the existing payments system such as various instant payments initiatives combined with the cross-border efficiency of properly structured stablecoins could well make superfluous any effort to develop a CBDC. In contrast to stablecoins, cryptoassets like bitcoin are not tied to the value of an asset like a sovereign currency. Rather, they seek to create value in the coin through other means, usually some intrinsic mechanism to ensure scarcity, like bitcoin's mining process, or some characteristic of the coin that cannot be matched by the traditional payment system, such as inviolable anonymity. Some commentators assert that the United States must develop a CBDC to counter the appeal of cryptocurrencies. This seems mistaken. The mechanisms used to create such cryptoassets' value also ensure that this value will be highly volatile—rather similar to the fluctuating value of gold, which, like bitcoin, draws a significant part of its value from its scarcity, and like bitcoin, does not play a significant role in today's payments or monetary system. Unlike gold, however, which has industrial uses and aesthetic attributes quite apart from its vestigial financial role, bitcoin's principal additional attractions are its novelty and its anonymity. The anonymity will make it appropriately the target for increasingly comprehensive scrutiny from law enforcement and the novelty is a rapidly wasting asset. Gold will always glitter, but novelty, by definition, fades. Bitcoin and its ilk will, accordingly, almost certainly remain a risky and speculative investment rather than a revolutionary means of payment, and they are therefore highly unlikely to affect the role of the U.S. dollar or require a response with a CBDC. A second broad argument raised by proponents of CBDCs is that a Federal Reserve CBDC would improve access to digital payments for people who currently do not keep bank accounts because of their expense, a lack of trust in banks, or other reasons. This is a worthwhile goal. However, I believe we can promote financial inclusion more efficiently by taking steps to make cheap, basic commercial bank accounts more available to people for whom the current cost is burdensome, such as the Bank On accounts developed in collaboration between the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund and many local coalitions.7Between 2011 and 2019, the percentage of households that are unbanked dropped from 8.2 percent to an estimated 5.4 percent.8Banks and regulators are working to shrink this percentage further still. I am far from convinced that a CBDC is the best, or even an effective, method to increase financial inclusion.9 Last, some believe that a Federal Reserve CBDC would spur and facilitate private-sector innovation. This is an interesting issue that merits further study. I am puzzled, however, as to how a Federal Reserve CBDC could promote innovation in a way that a private-sector stablecoin or other new payment mechanism could not. It seems to me that there has been considerable private-sector innovation in the payments industry without a CBDC, and it is conceivable that a Fed CBDC, or even plans for one, might deter private-sector innovation by effectively "occupying the field." In brief, the potential benefits of a Federal Reserve CBDC are unclear. Conversely, a Federal Reserve CBDC could pose significant and concrete risks. First, a Federal Reserve CBDC could create considerable challenges for the structure of our banking system, which currently relies on deposits to support the credit needs of households and businesses. An arrangement where the Federal Reserve replaces commercial banks as the dominant provider of money to the general public could constrict the availability of credit, fundamentally alter the economy, and expose the public to a host of unanticipated, and undesirable, consequences.10 Among other potential problems, a dominant CBDC could undermine the consumer and other economic benefits that accrue when commercial banks compete to attract customers. A Federal Reserve CBDC could also present an appealing target for cyberattacks and other security threats. Bad actors might try to steal CBDC, compromise the CBDC network, or target non-public information about holders of CBDC. The architecture of a Federal Reserve CBDC would need to be extremely resistant to such threats—and would need to remain resistant as bad actors employ ever-more sophisticated methods and tactics. Designing appropriate defenses for CBDC could be particularly difficult because, compared to the Federal Reserve's existing payment systems, there could be far more entry points to a CBDC network—depending on design choices, anyone in the world could potentially access the network.11 Critically, we also would need to ensure that a CBDC does not facilitate illicit activity. The Bank Secrecy Act currently requires that commercial banks take steps to guard against money laundering.12Policymakers will need to consider whether a similar anti-money-laundering regime would be feasible for a Federal Reserve CBDC, but it may be challenging to design a CBDC that respects individuals' privacy while appropriately minimizing the risk of money laundering. At one extreme, we could design a CBDC that would require CBDC holders to provide the Federal Reserve detailed information about themselves and their transactions; this approach would minimize money-laundering risks but would raise significant privacy concerns. At the other extreme, we could design a CBDC that would allow parties to transact on a fully anonymized basis; this approach would address privacy concerns but would raise significant money-laundering risks. A final risk is that developing a Federal Reserve CBDC could be expensive and difficult for the Federal Reserve to manage. A Federal Reserve CBDC could, in essence, set up the Federal Reserve as a retail bank to the general public. That would mean introducing large-scale, resource-intensive central bank infrastructure. We will need to consider whether the potential use cases for a CBDC justify such costs and expansion of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities into unfamiliar activities, together with the risk of politicization of the Fed's mandate that would come with such an expansion. To conclude, I emphasize three points. First, the U.S. dollar payment system is very good, and it is getting better. Second, the potential benefits of a Federal Reserve CBDC are unclear. Third, developing a CBDC could, I believe, pose considerable risks. So, our work is cut out for us as we proceed to rigorously evaluate the case for developing a Federal Reserve CBDC. Even if other central banks issue successful CBDCs, we cannot assume that the Federal Reserve should issue a CBDC. The process that Chair Powell recently announced is a genuinely open process without a foregone conclusion, although obviously I think the bar to establishing a U.S. CBDC is a high one. The upcoming discussion paper that constitutes the first step in this process will importantly ask for input from the public. I look forward to reviewing public input on the discussion paper, which will inform the Federal Reserve's ultimate evaluation of a potential CBDC. 1. SeeCentral Bank Digital Currencies: Foundational Principles and Core Features(Basel: Bank for International Settlements, October 9, 2020).Return to text 2. "Fedwire Funds Service—Monthly Statistics" (web page), Federal Reserve Bank Services, accessed June 27, 2021.Return to text 3. See "About CHIPS" (web page), The Clearing House, accessed June 27, 2021.Return to text 4. Financial Stability Board, "FSB Delivers a Roadmap to Enhance Cross-Border Payments," news release, October 13, 2020.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,2019 Federal Reserve Payments Study(Washington: Board of Governors, December 2019).Return to text 6. Financial Stability Board,Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of "Global Stablecoin" Arrangements(Basel: Financial Stability Board, October 13, 2020).Return to text 7. Seehttps://joinbankon.org/.Return to text 8. "Key Findings from How America Banks: Household Use of Banking and Financial Services" (web page), Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, accessed June 27, 2021.Return to text 9. It seems unlikely, for example, that people who avoid bank accounts because of concerns about privacy or trust in the banking system, rather than the cost of such accounts, will greatly prefer having accounts with the Federal Reserve.Return to text 10. The Federal Reserve also needs to consider whether private-sector stablecoins could disintermediate deposits out of the banking system, but in general, the risk of disintermediation should be lower for stablecoins compared to a CBDC. Importantly, if a stablecoin is backed by short-term securities, the stablecoin provider must take the funds received in return for the issuance of stablecoins and purchase short-term securities for the stablecoin "anchor" pool. The seller of those securities will then take the funds received and put them back into the banking system.Return to text 11. Private-sector stablecoins are also subject to cyber risk, of course, but any individual private stablecoin network would be less systemic than a CBDC for an entire advanced economy, and private companies are frequently better able to make the rapid and constant investment in technology required to keep current with technological security threats.Return to text 12. See, e.g., 31 U.S.C. § 5318(h).Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At The Economic Club of New York, New York, New York (via webcast) It is a pleasure to join the Economic Club of New York for this discussion.1Consumer demand is strong, vaccine coverage is expanding, and pandemic-affected sectors are reopening in fits and starts. As was the pandemic shutdown with its ebbs and flows, the reopening is without precedent, and it is generating supply–demand mismatches at the sectoral level that are temporary in nature. Separating signal from noise in the high-frequency data may be challenging for a stretch. The supply–demand mismatches at the sectoral level are making it difficult to precisely assess inflationary developments and the amount of resource slack from month to month. Looking through the noise, I expect we will see further progress in coming months, but the economy is far from our goals, and there are risks on both sides. The best way to achieve our maximum-employment and average-inflation goals is to be steady and transparent in our outcome-based approach to monetary policy while remaining attentive to the evolution of the data and prepared to adjust as needed. Pent-Up Demand and Supply ConstraintsLast week's updated estimate of first-quarter real gross domestic product continued to show strong annualized growth of 6.4 percent. I expect a further acceleration in output growth driven by consumer demand during the current quarter as the reopening of the economy broadens.2 Looking through the month-to-month variation, the data suggest that very strong underlying spending growth is continuing this quarter, fueled by recent fiscal support and continued reopening. Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) stepped down slightly in April after surging 4.1 percent month over month in March due to a strong spend-out that month of fiscal support from the American Rescue Plan. A similar pattern of moderation in April following outsized strength in March is also evident at the level of individual goods categories, including clothing and general merchandise, as well as spending at sporting goods, hobby, books, and music stores. Spending growth is strong in the pandemic-affected services sectors that are reopening, with spending at restaurants and bars increasing 3 percent in April after surging 13.5 percent in March. The shift in the spending data from March to April provides a useful reminder to exercise caution in extrapolating from individual data points in the current environment. Growth this year is expected to be the strongest in decades as the economy bounces back from the depressed level associated with the pandemic. The supplemental savings accumulated over the course of the pandemic from fiscal support and constrained services consumption hold the potential for a substantial amount of additional spending, but there is uncertainty about how much of it is likely to be spent out this year as opposed to being spent out more slowly over time. While the early spend-out from fiscal support in the first quarter of this year was exceptionally strong, whether that strength will be maintained depends in part on the distribution of the remaining additional savings. Spending could moderate, for instance, if the additional savings is concentrated among higher-income households that may have already completed many of their durable goods purchases and may return to pre-pandemic consumption of discretionary services rather than making up for the underconsumption during the shutdown.3The timing of household consumption out of the accumulated savings will be very important for the strength of demand not just this year, but also next. Today's fiscal tailwinds are projected to shift to headwinds next year. So an important question is how much household spending will continue to support growth into next year as opposed to settling back to pre-pandemic trends, which would be an additional headwind relative to the strong makeup consumption we have seen so far this year. During the current reopening phase, the surge in demand is hitting some sectors before the supply side has had a chance to catch up. Many businesses shrank in order to survive the pandemic and now may be struggling or moving cautiously to expand capacity. These mismatches are exacerbated in some sectors by idiosyncratic supply disruptions, such as in semiconductors, steel, and lumber. Importantly, the reopening pains associated with mismatches between demand and supply in most sectors are temporary in nature and are likely to be resolved as pent-up demand moderates and businesses hire and expand. These temporary reopening mismatches are evident in recent data on both the employment and inflation sides of our mandate. Supply–Demand Mismatches in InflationThe reopening dynamics are evident in the April inflation readings. I had been anticipating a notable move up in inflation beginning in April and lasting several months due to a combination of base effects and temporary reopening supply and demand mismatches.4Core PCE inflation moved up to 3.1 percent on a 12-month basis in April, while 12-month total PCE inflation rose to 3.6 percent amid high energy prices. A significant portion of these 12-month readings reflect contributions from base effects that resulted from the pandemic-related price declines in March 2020 dropping out of the 12-month calculation. Core PCE inflation is estimated to be 2.4 percent in April after adjusting for base effects. Apart from base effects, the underlying factors driving the increase in inflation are consistent with my expectations that we would see temporary price increases associated with sectoral supply–demand imbalances, and that the timing and sectoral incidence of these increases would be difficult to predict. While the level of inflation in my near-term outlook has moved somewhat higher, my expectation for the contour of inflation moving back towards its underlying trend in the period beyond the reopening remains broadly unchanged. The increases in a few categories that were prominent contributors to the month-over-month April core PCE reading of 0.66 percent illustrate the role of temporary frictions associated with the economy's unprecedented reopening. Used vehicles, airfares, and accommodations together contributed nearly one-third of month-over-month core PCE inflation in April even though the cumulative weight of all three components in the core PCE basket is only 3 percent. The major contributors to the April core PCE inflation increase are not significant drivers of core inflation historically. The used vehicles category contributed just over 0.1 percentage point to the April core PCE reading. On the demand side, stimulus payments and low borrowing rates have given households additional capability to purchase vehicles, and the pandemic appears to have increased the relative value of private transportation. On the supply side, with the limited production of new cars due to the semiconductor shortage, rental car companies have become buyers in the used vehicles market in order to restore the capacity they had shuttered during the pandemic, whereas they would normally be net sellers in this market. As a result, used car prices, which had followed a slight downward trend in the years leading up to the pandemic, jumped a record 10 percent in April. While these pressures may persist over the summer months, I expect them to fade and likely reverse somewhat in subsequent quarters. Similarly, the travel-related accommodations and airfare sectors also contributed nearly 0.1 percentage point to month-over-month core PCE inflation. Prices in these categories are recovering from depressed values well below their pre-COVID levels. Prices are expected to continue to rise amid renewed summer travel, but the natural limitations to making up spending on foregone travel are likely to result in a normalization of demand growth after a few quarters, and the capacity in these sectors will likewise increase from their depressed pandemic levels as hiring proceeds. In assessing the risk that such transitory pricing pressures get embedded in persistently high inflation, it is critical to remember that inflation averaged less than 2 percent over the past quarter-century, and that statistical measures of trend inflation ran consistently below 2 percent for decades before the pandemic.5Relative to the entrenched inflation dynamics that existed before the pandemic, the sharp temporary increases in some categories of goods and services seem unlikely to leave an imprint on longer-run inflation behavior. To be sure, I will keep a close watch on a range of indicators for any signs of an unwelcome change in longer-term inflation expectations. The measure of breakeven inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) suggests that the recent inflation data have not disturbed longer-run inflation expectations. Indeed, since the April consumer price index data were released, TIPS-based breakeven inflation compensation for the next five years, as well as those for the five-year, five-year-forward, have moved down, not up. The TIPS measures suggest that market participants are demanding less compensation for expected longer-term inflation than they were before the April inflation data were released, rather than more. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations are mixed. The most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters showed an increase in median PCE inflation expectations over the next five years from 2 percent to 2.2 percent, and a smaller increase for inflation expectations over the next 10 years, from 2 percent to 2.1 percent.6Similar to the market-based measures, this survey measure implies a slight decline in the forward inflation measure used to proxy for longer-term inflation expectations relative to medium-term expectations. In contrast, the median response in May to the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers regarding inflation over the next 5 to 10 years moved up to a level last reached in 2013.7The Board staff's Index of Common Inflation Expectations, which combines the most recent signals from both market- and survey-based indicators, edged up a few basis points, reaching the bottom end of its range of values before the 2014 decline.8 The inflation dynamics seen over the past few decades have led to inflation that is somewhat below target and relatively stable. Inflation dynamics have generally evolved very gradually. Longer-term inflation expectations have been well anchored, so when some developments have pushed inflation above or below target, the rise has not been embedded in the ongoing inflation rate. Supply–Demand Mismatches in EmploymentA temporary mismatch between the surge in demand and a fitful supply response at the sectoral level is also evident in recent employment data. While job openings are at the top of their range, the payroll data in April were surprisingly weak. In part, the weak payrolls reflected some sectors where supply chain disruptions are limiting production despite strong demand. While motor vehicle sales were robust through April, a semiconductor shortage has resulted in production limits and the idling of a number of U.S. auto plants.9These plant closings were evident in a decline of 27,000 jobs in the manufacturing of motor vehicles and parts in April, more than accounting for the 18,000 decline in manufacturing employment overall. Similarly, employment in construction was flat in April after increasing notably in March, as single-family housing starts dropped 13 percent over the month amid shortages of lumber that constrained contractors' activity.10 The lackluster 218,000 increase in private payrolls in April also reflects post-pandemic sectoral reallocation. Sectors that expanded employment substantially in response to COVID-related demand appear to be shedding jobs in preparation for a post-pandemic world, with delivery services jobs declining by 77,000 and grocery store jobs declining by 50,000. With the most recent Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey data showing a record 8.1 million job openings at the end of March, it appears that labor supply is lagging behind labor demand in several sectors, in part reflecting ongoing concerns about the virus and caregiving responsibilities.11At the time of the April survey, 2.8 million people reported being out of the labor force because of the pandemic, and only 23 percent of the 18-to-64-year-old population were fully vaccinated. The vaccinated fraction of the working-age population had increased to 40 percent by mid-May.12Constraints related to schooling and childcare are ongoing, and these have disproportionately affected Black and Hispanic mothers and mothers in lower-income households.13While it is now rare for a school district to be fully remote, recent estimates indicate that just over one-half of U.S. students are in school districts that continue to operate in a hybrid learning environment rather than fully in person.14 There is some debate about whether the supplemental funds provided by unemployment insurance (UI) benefits are leading workers to stay on the sidelines.15The high level of employment gains in the lowest-wage sector and the reduction in continued claims seem inconsistent with supplemental UI benefits playing a large role in the April employment report. The largest employment gains in the otherwise tepid April employment report were in the low-wage leisure and hospitality sector, where UI replacement rates are among the highest. In addition, between the March and April reference weeks, continued UI claims, inclusive of Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation and Extended Benefits, fell by about 1.3 million—indicating that many workers returned to work despite previously receiving UI benefits. It is difficult to disentangle the effects of concerns about contracting the virus or caregiving responsibilities brought on by the pandemic from those of UI benefits. All of these factors are likely to diminish by autumn with the return to fully in-person school, continued progress on vaccinations, and the expiration of supplemental UI benefits in early September—or earlier, in many states. For all these reasons, the supply–demand mismatches in the labor market are likely to be temporary, and I expect to see further progress on employment in coming months. That said, today employment remains far from our goal. Jobs are down by over 8 million relative to their pre-pandemic level, and the shortfall is over 10 million jobs if we take into account the secular job growth that would have occurred over the past year in normal circumstances. As of April, the overall prime-age employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio is 76.9 percent, more than 3 percentage points below its pre-pandemic level. The shortfall in the prime-age EPOP ratio is around 5 percentage points for Black and Hispanic workers relative to their October 2019 peaks. PolicyAlthough continued vigilance is warranted, the inflation and employment data thus far appear to reflect a temporary misalignment of supply and demand that should fade over time as the demand surge normalizes, reopening is completed, and supply adapts to the post-pandemic new normal. Under our guidance, adjustments in the path of monetary policy are transparently tied to realized progress on our maximum-employment and 2 percent average-inflation goals. Jobs are down by between 8 and 10 million compared with the level we would have seen in the absence of the pandemic. And it will be important to see sustained progress on inflation given the preceding multiple year trend of inflation below 2 percent. While we are far from our goals, we are seeing welcome progress, and I expect to see further progress in coming months. I am attentive to the risks on both sides of this expected path. I will carefully monitor inflation and indicators of inflation expectations for any signs that longer-term inflation expectations are evolving in unwelcome ways. Should inflation move materially and persistently above 2 percent, we have the tools and experience to gently guide inflation back down to target, and no one should doubt our commitment to do so. Just as it is important to be attentive to upside risks, it is also important to be attentive to the risks of pulling back too soon. In the previous monetary policy framework, the customary preemptive tightening based on the outlook to head off concerns about future high inflation likely curtailed critical employment opportunities for many Americans and embedded persistently below-target inflation. The entrenched pre-pandemic combination of low equilibrium interest rates, low underlying trend inflation, and a flat Phillips curve is likely to reassert itself after reopening is complete. This type of environment creates asymmetric risks, since the lower bound constraint means that policy can respond more readily when inflation surprises to the upside than to the downside. Remaining steady in our outcomes-based approach during the transitory reopening surge will help ensure the economic momentum that will be needed as current tailwinds shift to headwinds is not curtailed by a premature tightening of financial conditions. The best way to achieve and sustain our maximum-employment and average-inflation goals is by remaining steady and clear in our approach while also being attentive to changing conditions. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For example, the median forecast for annualized real gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the second quarter is 7.9 percent in the most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters; see Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (2021),Second Quarter 2021 Survey of Professional Forecasters(Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, May). The most recent estimate of annualized second-quarter real GDP growth from the GDPNow model at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta was 9.3 percent; seehttps://www.atlantafed.org/cqer/research/gdpnow(accessed May 28, 2021). The Blue Chip consensus forecast for the second quarter was 9.2 percent in May.Return to text 3. See Wendy Edelberg and Louise Sheiner (2021), "The Macroeconomic Implications of Biden's $1.9 Trillion Fiscal Package," Brookings Institute,Up Front(blog).Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard (2021), "Patience and Progress as the Economy Reopens and Recovers," speech delivered at "The Road to Recovery and What's Next," a virtual conference sponsored by the Society for Advancing Business Editing and Writing (via webcast), May 11.Return to text 5. Monthly 12-month total PCE inflation averaged 1.8 percent over the 25 years ending in April 2021. Statistical models estimate that underlying core PCE inflation ranged from 0.1 to 0.4 percentage point below the 2 percent longer-run target in the period just before the pandemic. See the point estimates for 2019:Q2 in table 1 in Jeremy B. Rudd (2020), "Underlying Inflation: Its Measurement and Significance," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18).Return to text 6. For more information on the Survey of Professional Forecasters, see Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (2021),Second Quarter 2021 Survey of Professional Forecasters(Philadelphia: FRB Philadelphia, May).Return to text 7. For more information on the University of Michigan's Surveys of Consumers, seehttps://data.sca.isr.umich.edu.Return to text 8. For more information about the Index of Common Inflation Expectations, see Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020), "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2).Return to text 9. According to media reports, a number of U.S. auto plants have been idled by the shortage of semiconductors. See, for example, Mike Colias (2021), "GM to Halt Production at Several North American Plants Due to Chip Shortage,"Wall Street Journal,April 8, https://www.wsj.com/articles/gm-to-halt-production-at-several-north-american-plants-due-to-chip-shortage-11617893417; and Nora Naughton (2021), "Ford Prolongs Shutdowns at Several U.S. Plants Due to Chip Shortage,"Wall Street Journal,April 21, https://www.wsj.com/articles/ford-prolongs-shutdowns-at-several-u-s-plants-due-to-chip-shortage-11619031751.Return to text 10. According to an April survey by the National Association of Home Builders, price spikes in lumber have led 19 percent of respondents to delay building or selling homes and another 15 percent to pour the foundation and then pause building until framing was possible; see Paul Emrath (2021), "How Builders Try to Deal with Rising Lumber Prices,"Eye On Housing(blog), April 21.Return to text 11. The labor force participation rate (LFPR) of women ages 25 to 34 stepped up 0.7 percentage point in March to 76 percent but was unchanged in April at that level. Likewise, the LFPR for women ages 35 to 44 moved up 0.4 percentage point to 74.5 percent in March and was unchanged in April. Research has shown that mothers are bearing the majority of pandemic-related childcare responsibilities. Labor force participation fell much less for fathers compared with other men and all women at the onset of the pandemic; the recovery has also been more pronounced for men and women without children. See Olivia Lofton, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lily Seitelman (2021), "Parental Participation in a Pandemic Labor Market," FRBSF Economic Letter 2021-10 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April 5).Return to text 12. The share of people ages 18 to 64 years old who are fully vaccinated is calculated using the percentage of people fully vaccinated on April 17 by age group according to the CDC's COVID Data Tracker (available athttps://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker)and then weighting each age group based on the U.S. Census Bureau's 2019 population estimates (available athttps://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest/technical-documentation/file-layouts/2010-2019/nc-est2019-agesex-res.csv) for the corresponding age group.Return to text 13. In the most recent Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, 36 percent of Black mothers and 30 percent of Hispanic mothers reported not working or working less at some point in 2020 because of disruptions to childcare or in-person K–12 schooling. Similarly, 33 percent of unmarried mothers and nearly one-third of mothers with family income less than $50,000 reported not working or working less. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),Economic Well-Being of U.S. Householdsin 2020(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May). Research also indicates that participation for mothers in households with an annual income below $50,000 per year declined nearly 9 percent relative to pre-pandemic levels, while participation for mothers in households with incomes above $100,000 fell a little under 2 percent. For more information, see Olivia Lofton, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lily Seitelman (2021), "Parents in a Pandemic Labor Market," Working Paper Series 2021-04 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February).Return to text 14. Staff calculations using data from the week of May 10, 2021, indicate that the fraction of students in a school district utilizing a hybrid of remote and in-person learning is 56 percent, whereas 42 percent of students have returned to fully in-person education and about 2 percent are in districts that remain in a fully remote-learning posture. These shares of students are calculated using school districts' operating statuses from the AEI's Return to Learn Tracker, where each school district is weighted based on the number of students enrolled in 2019 according to the National Center for Education Statistics. Seehttps://www.returntolearntracker.net.Return to text 15. Research indicates that the additional income provided to the unemployed through the CARES Act likely had little labor-supply-induced effect on the unemployment rate in early to mid-2020 and likely only a small effect on the job-finding rate in early 2021. For more information, see Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau and Robert G. Valletta (2021), "UI Generosity and Job Acceptance: Effects of the 2020 CARES Act," Working Paper Series 2021-13 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May), and the citations within.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Select Subcommittee on the Coronavirus Crisis, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Clyburn, Ranking Member Scalise, and other members of the Select Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to update you on our ongoing measures to address the hardship wrought by the pandemic. Since we last met, the economy has shown sustained improvement. Widespread vaccinations have joined unprecedented monetary and fiscal policy actions in providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real GDP this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. Much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounce back in activity from depressed levels. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak, but have shown improvement. Household spending is rising at a rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy, fiscal support, and accommodative financial conditions. The housing sector is strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. In some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, although the pace has been uneven. The unemployment rate remained elevated in May at 5.8 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Job gains should pick up in coming months as vaccinations rise, easing some of the pandemic-related factors currently weighing them down. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. The Fed pursues monetary policy aimed at fostering a strong, stable economy that can improve economic outcomes for all Americans. Those who have historically been left behind stand the best chance of prospering in a strong economy with plentiful job opportunities. And our economy will be stronger and perform better when everyone can contribute to, and share in, the benefits of prosperity. Inflation has increased notably in recent months. This reflects, in part, the very low readings from early in the pandemic falling out of the calculation; the pass-through of past increases in oil prices to consumer energy prices; the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen; and the exacerbating factor of supply bottlenecks, which have limited how quickly production in some sectors can respond in the near term. As these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal. The pandemic continues to pose risks to the economic outlook. Progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of COVID-19 and will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy. However, the pace of vaccinations has slowed and new strains of the virus remain a risk. Continued progress on vaccinations will support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed's policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. In response to the crisis, we took broad and forceful measures to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy and to promote the stability of the financial system at the onset of the pandemic. Our actions, taken together, helped unlock more than $2 trillion of funding to support businesses large and small, nonprofits, and state and local governments between April and December of 2020. This, in turn, helped keep organizations from shuttering and put employers in a better position to keep workers on and to hire them back as the recovery continues. Our facilities were designed as backstops to private credit markets, not as replacements. Once lenders and investors understood that borrowers would have access to emergency loans, conditions improved. For example, yields and spreads on municipal bonds started to fall dramatically following the announcement that some municipal notes would be eligible at our money fund facility and that we were opening the Municipal Liquidity Facility. This is detailed in the charts accompanying my testimony. Over the succeeding months, issuance of municipal debt surged. Over the period from April to December 2020, state and local governments and other muni issuers borrowed almost $380 billion in the private markets at extremely attractive rates, and 2020 as a whole saw the highest volume of municipal issuance on record. We have deployed these lending tools to an unprecedented extent. Our emergency lending tools require the approval of the Treasury and are available only in unusual and exigent circumstances, such as those brought on by the crisis. Many of these programs were supported by funding from the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act). Those facilities provided essential support through a very difficult year and are now closed. We continue to analyze the facilities' efficacy and to review the lessons learned from their establishment and operation, and additional analysis is included in my written testimony. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. Note: Spreads on municipal bonds are relative to comparable-maturity Treasury yields. The ICE triple-A and triple-B indexes have a weighted average maturity between 12 and 13 years and between 16 and 17 years, respectively, over the period shown. The Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) was expanded on March 23, 2020. The Municipal LiquidityFacility (MLF) was announced on April 9, 2020. Source: ICE Data Indices, LLC, used with permission; Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Federal Reserve Board staff estimates. Accessible version Note: The Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) was expanded on March 23, 2020. The Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) was announced on April 9, 2020. Lines indicating dates of MMLF expansion and MLF announcement are placed before the bar reflecting total issuance in the week of announcement. Key identifies series in order from bottom to top. Source: Mergent, Fixed Income Securities Database. Accessible version Review of Section 13(3) Facilities Using CARES Act Funding The Corporate Credit Facilities The Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (together, the Corporate Credit Facilities) were designed to support the flow of credit to large investment-grade U.S. companies so that they could maintain business operations and capacity during the period of dislocation related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The announcement effect of the Corporate Credit Facilities was strong; it quickly improved market functioning, reduced default probabilities, and lowered spreads of both investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds. The announcement and presence of the facilities thereby unlocked the supply of hundreds of billions of dollars of private credit without direct government involvement or taxpayer exposure. The Main Street Lending Program The Federal Reserve established the Main Street Lending Program (Main Street) to support lending to small and medium-sized businesses and nonprofit organizations that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Main Street provided an effective backstop and supported credit provision in the private sector, substantially adding to the supply of credit for the smallest eligible borrowers. The program was also effective in promoting lending to the locations at the times it was most needed in light of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Municipal Liquidity Facility The Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) helped state and local governments better manage the extraordinary cash flow pressures associated with the pandemic when expenses, often for critical services, were temporarily higher than normal and tax revenues were delayed or temporarily lower than normal. The MLF contributed to a strong and rapid recovery in municipal securities markets and thereby helped a wide variety of state and local governments and their instrumentalities issue debt with interest rates at or near historic lows. This rapid recovery also led to record new issuance with increased demand from municipal investors, including very strong inflows to municipal bond funds, and improved secondary market conditions. Ultimately, the increased availability of credit to municipal borrowers helped them maintain employment and capacity by avoiding forced cutbacks in payrolls and other critical operations. The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) supported the issuance of securities backed by newly and recently originated student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, commercial mortgages, loans backed by the Small Business Administration, and certain other assets. The announcement and presence of the TALF substantially helped improve liquidity in the asset-backed securities markets, including those for commercial mortgage-backed securities and collateralized loan obligations, and contributed to rapid improvement in credit markets for consumers and businesses. Ultimately, the TALF helped promote the longer-term, market-based financing that is critical to the real economy. Billions of dollars Note: The data are current as of June 17, 2021. 1. The maximum authorized amount of facility asset purchases.Return to table 2. Current and peak outstanding amounts of facility asset purchases. 3. The amount of the Treasury contribution to the credit facilities.Return to table Source: For the amount of assets and Treasury equity remaining, see Federal Reserve Board (2021), Statistical Release H.4.1, “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks,” June 17,https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41; the peak amounts of assets for each facility are based on the H.4.1 from the start of the corresponding facility until June 17. Accessible Version