Credit risk for large, syndicated loans has increased over the last year, according to the 2020 Shared National Credit (SNC) Review released by federal bank regulatory agencies today. The elevated risk is largely attributed to the effects of COVD-19. While risk has increased, many agent banks have strengthened their risk management systems since the prior downturn and are better equipped to measure and mitigate risks associated with loans in the current environment. The review, which evaluates the quality of large syndicated loans, was conducted by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and reflects examination of SNC loans originated on or before June 30, 2020. The 2020 results provide additional analysis focusing on borrowers in five industries that were affected significantly by the pandemic: entertainment and recreation, oil and gas, real estate, retail, and transportation services. The 2020 SNC portfolio included 5,652 borrowers, totaling $5.1 trillion in commitments, up 5.0 percent from a year ago. Nearly half of the total commitments were leveraged loans. The percentage of "non-pass" loans, including special mention and classified SNC commitments, for the portfolio rose from 6.9 percent to 12.4 percent year over year. While U.S banks held nearly 45 percent of all SNC commitments, they held less than a quarter of non-pass loans. For leveraged borrowers operating in COVID-19 affected industries, non-pass loans rose from 13.5 percent to 29.2 percent year over year. Commitments to borrowers in COVID-19 affected industries represented about one-fifth of all SNC commitments. In response to the increase in loan risks, banks substantially increased their loan-loss reserves, and aggregate capital in the system has risen by nearly a percentage point since March of 2020. Supervisors will monitor the performance of this portfolio relative to the increased loss cushion established by banks during 2020. Note:This release was revised on July 30, 2021 to correct an error in the historical 2009 – 2018 data for the Financial and Commodities industries in Appendix C: Summary of SNC Industry Trends.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the "Advance Together" Celebration sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (via webcast) Thank you, President Kaplan, our Advance Together partners, and everyone here for joining us today. I am honored to participate in this event and welcome the awardees of this important initiative to celebrate your success. Today marks a significant milestone in this effort to improve economic opportunity for residents of 25 counties across the great state of Texas. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas created Advance Together as a way to promote initiatives in Texas that reduce inequities in education and workforce development, and these Implementation Awards recognize outstanding examples of furthering those goals. The Importance of Education and Workforce Development InitiativesAt the Federal Reserve, our community development mission is to promote economic growth and financial stability across the country, particularly in vulnerable communities. The ability to access quality education and training to build workforce skills is critical for low-income workers seeking greater opportunity for themselves and their families. Likewise, reducing the disparities in labor market opportunities among individuals in our society helps to support broader economic growth and financial stability. These issues have taken on even greater importance over the past year. The COVID-19 pandemic has upended our personal and professional lives and continues to cause economic hardship for many Americans. While the economy has recovered substantially from the effects of the pandemic, it is concerning to see signs that the improvements have been uneven, with some households continuing to struggle with unemployment and facing financial difficulty. Information from the Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, or SHED, provides evidence of these disparities.1In the July 2020 responses to the SHED, many households reported major employment disruptions due to COVID-19, including layoffs, reductions of hours, or unpaid leave. By mid-summer, many of the affected individuals had returned to work, and many were receiving unemployment insurance benefits and other financial assistance. Even so, unemployment remained very high in July, and 23 percent of SHED respondents said they were either "just getting by" or "finding it difficult to get by." Not surprisingly, those experiencing employment disruptions disproportionately reported that they were likely to have difficulty paying their bills. The survey showed that employment disruptions and financial challenges disproportionately affected people of color and low-income families. And, unlike during previous recessions, a larger share of working women than men were laid off from their jobs.2 For many families, the pandemic exacerbated existing financial challenges. Economic mobility is largely driven by family financial stability and geographic resources such as transportation, quality education, and broadband access. The Fed's research and its ongoing work in community development show that there is no quick fix for the disparities in household financial stability. And no single organization or government agency can solve these complex problems alone. The Importance of Collaborative EffortsThis brings me to the importance of collaboration to address multidimensional community issues. While affordable housing and quality jobs are two very visible needs for low-income households, meeting these needs requires strategies that stretch across the fabric of the whole community, including childcare, education and training, transportation, and a safe and healthy environment. Collaboration between individuals and organizations of different talents and strengths can help find the kind of holistic solutions needed to bring greater opportunity to those at risk of being left behind in the recovery. Today, we are here to celebrate Advance Together, one such effort to foster economic inclusion through innovative and collaborative programs. In 2020, the Federal Reserve completed a review of "place based" community development initiatives, those focused on a single community or area, across its 12 districts. While the place-based initiatives varied in purpose, scope, and approach from community to community, the very best of those local collaborations are reflected in Advance Together's winning proposals. Most notably, each of these community-driven initiatives uses evidence-based research, fosters public–private partnerships, and promotes a collective vision for success. The four winners that we are honoring today are the Educate Midland and Education Partnership of the Permian Basin; the Big Country Manufacturing Alliance, based in Abilene; the Family Pathways 2-Gen Coalition in Austin; and the Deep East Texas College and Career Alliance. It has truly been a pleasure to learn about the unique and innovative efforts each of you are undertaking to address the education and workforce challenges in your own communities. Members of the Educate Midland & Education Partnership are analyzing student data to deepen their understanding of student outcomes by race and to identify practices that can reduce inequities in education and workforce development that limit economic opportunity. The Big Country Manufacturing Alliance is streamlining training and job placement for young workers interested in manufacturing careers. The Family Pathways 2-Gen Coalition supports students with children on their path to a college degree. And, finally, the Deep East Texas College and Career Alliance is helping rural and first-generation college students attain post-secondary credentials that are in demand by employers. Just as Advance Together benefited from past place-based initiatives, the lessons learned from your local collaborations will inform and influence new community strategies going forward. I look forward to following your efforts to create economic opportunity in communities across Texas. It's really an honor to join in your celebration today. Congratulations to the winners and thank you to all of the participants. 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Update on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households: July 2020 Results(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, September).Return to text 2. See Board of Governors,Update on the Economic Well-Being,in note 1.Return to text
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the state regulators, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of Texas Winter Storms on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found athttps://www.fema.gov/disaster/4586 Lending:The agencies encouragefinancial institutions to work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Texas Winter Storms. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas should not be subject to examiner criticism. Institutions should individually evaluate modifications of existing loans to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings according to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Institutions should consider the facts and circumstances of each borrower and loan, and apply judgment, as not all modifications will result in a troubled debt restructuring. In supervising institutions affected byTexas Winter Storms, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after Texas Winter Storms. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by Texas Winter Storms. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by Texas Winter Storms may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Texas Winter Storms that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements, if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of Texas Winter Storms. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, refer to the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Institutions are encouraged to monitor municipal securities and loans affected by Texas Winter Storms. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by the disaster and encourage institutions to engage in appropriate monitoring and take prudent efforts to stabilize such investments. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows:
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Regions Bank, Birmingham, Alabama, to establish a branch at Farm to Market Road 423 (West University Drive), just south of Highway 380, Frisco, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application under section 9 of the Federal Reserve Act by Simmons Bank, Pine Bluff, Arkansas, to establish a branch at 8319 Preston Road, Dallas, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a final rule that is intended to reduce risk and increase efficiency in the financial system by applying netting protections to a broader range of financial institutions. The final rule amends Regulation EE (Financial Institution Netting) to apply netting provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) to certain new entities including swap dealers. The rule would also make minor clarifications to the existing activities-based test in Regulation EE to clarify how the activities-based test applies following a consolidation of legal entities. Sections 401-407 of FDICIA validate netting contracts among financial institutions. Parties to a netting contract agree that they will pay or receive the net, rather than the gross, payment due under the netting contract. FDICIA provides certainty that netting contracts will be enforced, even in the event of the insolvency of one of the parties. Regulation EE currently includes an activities-based test pursuant to which an entity can qualify as a financial institution for purposes of FDICIA's netting provisions if it is a market intermediary and, during the previous 15-month period, it engaged in financial contracts exceeding specified numerical thresholds. Consistent with FDICIA's goals of reducing systemic risk and increasing efficiency in the financial markets, the Board's final rule expands the definition of financial institution to ensure that certain entities qualify as financial institutions, including swap dealers and security-based swap dealers; major swap participants and major security-based swap participants; nonbank systemically important financial institutions; certain financial market utilities; foreign banks; bridge institutions; qualifying central counterparties; the Bank for International Settlements; foreign central banks; and Federal Reserve Banks. The final rule also clarifies that, following a consolidation of legal entities, the surviving entity can determine whether its financial contracts exceeded the numerical thresholds in the activities-based test by considering the aggregated financial contracts of the consolidated persons during the previous 15-month period. The Board'sFederal Registernotice is attached. For media inquiries, call (202) 452-2955 Federal Register notice: Netting Eligibility for Financial Institutions (PDF) Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Hua Nan Commercial Bank Limited, Taipei City, Taiwan and Hua Nan Commercial Bank Limited New York Agency, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated April 19, 2018 (PDF)Terminated January 27, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Santander Holdings USA, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts and Santander Consumer USA, Inc., Dallas, TexasWritten Agreement dated March 21, 2017 (PDF)Terminated February 2, 2021 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the second extension of a rule to bolster the effectiveness of the Small Business Administration's (SBA) Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Like the earlier extensions, this one will temporarily modify the Board's rules so that certain bank directors and shareholders can apply to their banks for PPP loans for their small businesses. To prevent favoritism, the Board limits the types and quantity of loans that bank directors, shareholders, officers, and businesses owned by these persons can receive from their affiliated banks. However, these limits have prevented some small business owners from accessing PPP loans—especially in rural areas. The SBA clarified last year that PPP lenders can make PPP loans to businesses owned by their directors and certain shareholders, subject to certain limits, and without favoritism. The Board's rule extension will allow those individuals to apply for PPP loans, consistent with SBA's rules and restrictions. The extension only applies to PPP loans. The Board is providing the rule extension to allow banks to continue to make PPP loans to a broad range of small businesses within their communities. The SBA explicitly has prohibited banks from prioritizing or providing favorable processing time to PPP loan applications from a director or equity holder, and the Board will administer the rule extension accordingly. The rule extension is effective immediately and applies to PPP loans made through March 31, 2021. Comments will be accepted for 45 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Federal Registernotice: Loans to Executive Officers, Directors, and Principal Shareholders of Member Banks
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released the hypothetical scenarios for its 2021 bank stress tests. Last year, the Board found that large banks were generally well capitalized under a range of hypothetical events but due to continuing economic uncertainty placed restrictions on bank payouts to preserve the strength of the banking sector. The Board's stress tests help ensure that large banks are able to lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. The exercise evaluates the resilience of large banks by estimating their loan losses and capital levels—which provide a cushion against losses—under hypothetical recession scenarios that extend nine quarters into the future. "The banking sector has provided critical support to the economic recovery over the past year. Although uncertainty remains, this stress test will give the public additional information on its resilience," Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles said. The hypothetical recession begins in the first quarter of 2021 and features a severe global downturn with substantial stress in commercial real estate and corporate debt markets. The U.S. unemployment rate in the "severely adverse" scenario rises by 4 percentage points from its starting point, reaching a peak of 10-3/4 percent in the third quarter of 2022. Gross domestic product falls 4 percent from the fourth quarter of 2020 through the third quarter of 2022, with asset prices dropping sharply, including a 55 percent decline in equity prices. The chart below shows the path of the unemployment rate: This year, 19 large banks will be subject to the stress test. Smaller banks are on a two-year stress test cycle but can opt in to this year's test and must do so by April 5. Banks with large trading operations will be tested against a global market shock component that stresses their trading, private equity, and other fair value positions. Additionally, banks with substantial trading or processing operations will be tested against the default of their largest counterparty. A table below shows the components that would apply to each bank, as well as identifying which banks are on a two-year cycle, based on data as of September 30, 2020. The scenarios are not forecasts and the severely adverse scenario is significantly more severe than most current baseline projections for the path of the U.S. economy under the stress testing period. They are designed to assess the strength of large banks during hypothetical recessions, which is especially appropriate in a period of uncertainty. Each scenario includes 28 variables covering domestic and international economic activity. 2021 Stress Test Scenarios (PDF)
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Economic Club of New York (via webcast) Today I will discuss the state of our labor market, from the recent past to the present and then over the longer term. A strong labor market that is sustained for an extended period can deliver substantial economic and social benefits, including higher employment and income levels, improved and expanded job opportunities, narrower economic disparities, and healing of the entrenched damage inflicted by past recessions on individuals' economic and personal well-being. At present, we are a long way from such a labor market. Fully realizing the benefits of a strong labor market will take continued support from both near-term policy and longer-run investments so that all those seeking jobs have the skills and opportunities that will enable them to contribute to, and share in, the benefits of prosperity. The Labor Market of a Year AgoWe need only look to February of last year to see how beneficial a strong labor market can be. The overall unemployment rate was 3.5 percent, the lowest level in a half-century. The unemployment rate for African Americans had also reached historical lows (figure 1). Prime-age labor force participation was the highest in over a decade, and a high proportion of households saw jobs as "plentiful."1Overall wage growth was moderate, but wages were rising more rapidly for earners on the lower end of the scale. These encouraging statistics were reaffirmed and given voice by those we met and conferred with, including the community, labor, and business leaders; retirees; students; and others we met with during the 14Fed Listensevents we conducted in 2019.2 Many of these gains had emerged only in the later years of the expansion. The labor force participation rate, for example, had been steadily declining from 2008 to 2015 even as the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis unfolded. In fact, in 2015, prime-age labor force participation—which I focus on because it is not significantly affected by the aging of the population—reached its lowest level in 30 years even as the unemployment rate declined to a relatively low 5 percent. Also concerning was that much of the decline in participation up to that point had been concentrated in the population without a college degree (figure 2). At the time, many forecasters worried that globalization and technological change might have permanently reduced job opportunities for these individuals, and that, as a result, there might be limited scope for participation to recover. Fortunately, the participation rate after 2015 consistently outperformed expectations, and by the beginning of 2020, the prime-age participation rate had fully reversed its decline from the 2008-to-2015 period. Moreover, gains in participation were concentrated among people without a college degree. Given that U.S. labor force participation has lagged relative to other advanced economy nations, this progress was especially welcome (figure 3).3 As I mentioned, we also saw faster wage growth for low earners once the labor market had strengthened sufficiently. Nearly six years into the recovery, wage growth for the lowest earning quartile had been persistently modest and well below the pace enjoyed by other workers. At the tipping point of 2015, however, as the labor market continued to strengthen, the trend reversed, with wage growth for the lowest quartile consistently and significantly exceeding that of other workers (figure 4). At the end of 2015, the Black unemployment rate was still quite elevated, at 9 percent, despite the relatively low overall unemployment rate. But that disparity too began to shrink; as the expansion continued beyond 2015, Black unemployment reached a historic low of 5.2 percent, and the gap between Black and white unemployment rates was the narrowest since 1972, when data on unemployment by race started to be collected. Black unemployment has tended to rise more than overall unemployment in recessions but also to fall more quickly in expansions.4Over the course of a long expansion, these persistent disparities can decline significantly, but, without policies to address their underlying causes, they may increase again when the economy ultimately turns down. These late-breaking improvements in the labor market did not result in unwanted upward pressures on inflation, as might have been expected; in fact, inflation did not even rise to 2 percent on a sustained basis. There was every reason to expect that the labor market could have strengthened even further without causing a worrisome increase in inflation were it not for the onset of the pandemic. The Labor Market TodayThe state of our labor market today could hardly be more different. Despite the surprising speed of recovery early on, we are still very far from a strong labor market whose benefits are broadly shared. Employment in January of this year was nearly 10 million below its February 2020 level, a greater shortfall than the worst of the Great Recession's aftermath (figure 5). After rising to 14.8 percent in April of last year, the published unemployment rate has fallen relatively swiftly, reaching 6.3 percent in January. But published unemployment rates during COVID have dramatically understated the deterioration in the labor market. Most importantly, the pandemic has led to the largest 12-month decline in labor force participation since at least 1948.5Fear of the virus and the disappearance of employment opportunities in the sectors most affected by it, such as restaurants, hotels, and entertainment venues, have led many to withdraw from the workforce. At the same time, virtual schooling has forced many parents to leave the work force to provide all-day care for their children. All told, nearly 5 million people say the pandemic prevented them from looking for work in January. In addition, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that many unemployed individuals have been misclassified as employed. Correcting this misclassification and counting those who have left the labor force since last February as unemployed would boost the unemployment rate to close to 10 percent in January (figure 6). Unfortunately, even those grim statistics understate the decline in labor market conditions for the most economically vulnerable Americans. Aggregate employment has declined 6.5 percent since last February, but the decline in employment for workers in the top quartile of the wage distribution has been only 4 percent, while the decline for the bottom quartile has been a staggering 17 percent (figure 7). Moreover, employment for these workers has changed little in recent months, while employment for the higher-wage groups has continued to improve. Similarly, the unemployment rates for Blacks and Hispanics have risen significantly more than for whites since February 2020 (figure 8). As a result, economic disparities that were already too wide have widened further. In the past few months, improvement in labor market conditions stalled as the rate of infections sharply increased. In particular, jobs in the leisure and hospitality sector dropped over 1/2 million in December and a further 61,000 in January. The recovery continues to depend on controlling the spread of the virus, which will require mass vaccinations in addition to continued vigilance in social distancing and mask wearing in the meantime. Since the onset of the pandemic, we have been concerned about its longer-term effects on the labor market. Extended periods of unemployment can inflict persistent damage on lives and livelihoods while also eroding the productive capacity of the economy.6And we know from the previous expansion that it can take many years to reverse the damage. At the start of the pandemic, the increase in unemployment was almost entirely due to temporary job losses.7Temporarily laid-off workers tend to return to work much more quickly, on average, than those whose ties to their former employers are permanently severed. But as some sectors of the economy have continued to struggle, permanent job loss has increased (figure 9). So too has long-term unemployment. Still, as of January, the level of permanent job loss, as a fraction of the labor force, was considerably smaller than during the Great Recession. Research shows that the Paycheck Protection Program has played an important role in limiting permanent layoffs and preserving small businesses.8The renewal of the program this year in the face of another surge in COVID-related job cuts is an encouraging development. Of course, in a healthy market-based economy, perpetual churn will always render some jobs obsolete as they are replaced by new employment opportunities. Over time, workers and capital move from firm to firm and from sector to sector. It is likely that the pandemic has both increased the need for such movements and brought forward some movement that would have occurred eventually.9 Getting Back to a Strong Labor MarketSo how do we get from where we are today back to a strong labor market that benefits all Americans and that starts to heal the damage already done? And what can we do to sustain those benefits over time? Experience tells us that getting to and staying at full employment will not be easy. In the near term, policies that bring the pandemic to an end as soon as possible are paramount. In addition, workers and households who struggle to find their place in the post-pandemic economy are likely to need continued support. The same is true for many small businesses that are likely to prosper again once the pandemic is behind us. Also important is a patiently accommodative monetary policy stance that embraces the lessons of the past—about the labor market in particular and the economy more generally. I described several of those important lessons, as well as our new policy framework, at the Jackson Hole conference last year.10I have already mentioned the broad-based benefits that a strong labor market can deliver and noted that many of these benefits only arose toward the end of the previous expansion. I also noted that these benefits were achieved with low inflation. Indeed, inflation has been much lower and more stable over the past three decades than in earlier times. In addition, we have seen that the longer-run potential growth rate of the economy appears to be lower than it once was, in part because of population aging, and that the neutral rate of interest—or the rate consistent with the economy being at full employment with 2 percent inflation—is also much lower than before. A low neutral rate means that our policy rate will be constrained more often by the effective lower bound. That circumstance can lead to worse economic outcomes—particularly for the most economically vulnerable Americans. To take these economic developments into account, we made substantial revisions to our monetary policy framework, as described in the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.11This revised statement shares many features with its predecessor, including our view that longer-run inflation of 2 percent is most consistent with our mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. But it also has some innovations. The revised statement emphasizes that maximum employment is a broad and inclusive goal. This change reflects our appreciation for the benefits of a strong labor market, particularly for many in low- and moderate-income communities. Recognizing the economy's ability to sustain a robust job market without causing an unwanted increase in inflation, the statement says that our policy decisions will be informed by our "assessments of theshortfallsof employment from its maximum level" rather than by "deviationsfrom its maximum level."12This means that we will not tighten monetary policy solely in response to a strong labor market. Finally, to counter the adverse economic dynamics that could ensue from declines in inflation expectations in an environment where our main policy tool is more frequently constrained, we now explicitly seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. This means that following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time in the service of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. Our January postmeeting statement on monetary policy implements this new framework.13In particular, we expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current accommodative target range of the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities by $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The Broad Responsibility for Achieving Maximum EmploymentSeventy-five years ago, in the wake of WWII, the United States faced the challenge of reemploying millions amid a major restructuring of the economy toward peacetime ends.14Part of Congress's response was the Employment Act of 1946, which states that "it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the federal government to use all practicable means . . . to promote maximum employment."15As later amended in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, this provision formed the basis of the employment side of the Fed's dual mandate. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to doing all we can to promote this employment goal. Given the number of people who have lost their jobs and the likelihood that some will struggle to find work in the post-pandemic economy, achieving and sustaining maximum employment will require more than supportive monetary policy. It will require a society-wide commitment, with contributions from across government and the private sector. The potential benefits of investing in our nation's workforce are immense. Steady employment provides more than a regular paycheck. It also bestows a sense of purpose, improves mental health, increases lifespans, and benefits workers and their families.16I am confident that with our collective efforts across the government and the private sector, our nation will make sustained progress toward our national goal of maximum employment. 1. Data from the Conference Board's "Jobs Are Plentiful" series (February 2020). For more on the Conference Board, seehttps://www.conference-board.org.Return to text 2. AnotherFed Listensevent was held in 2020 to discuss the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. For a summary of all of theFed Listensevents, see the reportFed Listens: Perspectives from the Public,available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/fedlistens-report-20200612.pdf.Return to text 3. For data comparing labor force participation rates across countries, see Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021), "Labour Force Participation Rate" (indicator), OECD Data.Return to text 4. For a description of labor market outcomes by race and ethnicity over the business cycle, see Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" in James H. Stock and Janice Eberly, eds.,Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Washington: Brookings Institution Press, Spring), pp. 333–75; and Tomaz Cajner, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017), "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text 5. Published monthly data on labor force participation begin in 1948.Return to text 6. For research on the adverse consequences of permanent job loss, see Steven J. Davis and Till von Wachter (2011), "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," in David H. Romer and Justin Wolfers, eds.,Brookings Papers on Economic Activity(Washington: Brookings Institution Press, Fall), pp. 1–75; Kenneth A. Couch and Dana W. Placzek (2010), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited,"American Economic Review,vol. 100 (March), pp. 572–89; and Louis S. Jacobson, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,"American Economic Review,vol. 83 (September), pp. 685–709.Return to text 7. The Bureau of Labor Statistics defines a job loss as temporary if the affected worker has been given a date to return to work or expects to be recalled to their former job within six months.Return to text 8. For research on the effect of the Paycheck Protection Program on employment, see David Autor, David Cho, Leland D. Crane, Mita Goldar, Byron Lutz, Joshua Montes, William B. Peterman, David Ratner, Daniel Villar, and Ahu Yildirmaz (2020), "An Evaluation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata (PDF)," preliminary paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, July; João Granja, Christos Makridis, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick (2020), "Did the Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target? (PDF)" NBER Working Paper Series 27095 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May (revised November 2020)); and R. Glenn Hubbard and Michael R. Strain (2020), "Has the Paycheck Protection Program Succeeded? (PDF)" NBER Working Paper Series 28032 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October).Return to text 9. For a description of the reallocation of resources induced by the COVID-19 shock, see Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2020), "COVID-19 Is Also a Reallocation Shock (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 27137 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).Return to text 10. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.Return to text 11. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, revised in August 2020 and reaffirmed in January, is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.Return to text 12. Italics added for emphasis. See Powell, "New Economic Challenges," p. 11, in note 10.Return to text 13. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 27.Return to text 14. See Joseph T. Glatthaar (2018),The American Military: A Concise History(New York: Oxford University Press).Return to text 15. For a discussion, see Aaron Steelman (2013), "Employment Act of 1946," inFederal Reserve History; the quotation from the act is reprinted in Steelman, paragraph 1.Return to text 16. See, for example, Daniel Sullivan and Till von Wachter (2009), "Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using Administrative Data,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 124 (August), pp. 1265–1306; Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens (2008), "The Intergenerational Effects of Worker Displacement,"Journal of Labor Economics,vol. 26 (July), pp. 455–83; and Bruno S. Frey and Alois Stutzer (2002), "What Can Economists Learn from Happiness Research?"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 40 (June), pp. 402–35.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Lael Brainard At the Ec10, Principles of Economics, Lecture, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts (via webcast) I want to thank Jason Furman and David Laibson for inviting me to join your economics class. I often found it difficult in introductory economics to connect the abstract concepts in the textbooks to the real-world issues I cared about. So the one message I hope you remember from today is that economics provides powerful tools to enable you to analyze and affect the issues that matter most to you.1 With jobs down by 10 million relative to pre-pandemic levels, one issue that matters fundamentally to all of us is achieving full employment. So today I want to talk about both the Federal Reserve's responsibilities with regard to full employment and different approaches to assessing where we are relative to that goal. The belief that the federal government has a responsibility for full employment has its roots in the Great Depression. It was given statutory expression at the end of the Second World War when policymakers and legislators feared that the millions of American soldiers returning to the labor market would face Depression-era conditions.2In the Employment Act of 1946, the Congress directed the federal government as a whole to pursue "conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment for those able, willing, and seeking work, and to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power."3 The postwar policy discussion raised important issues surrounding the definition and measurement of full employment. In 1950, theReview of Economics and Statisticspublished a symposium titled "How Much Unemployment?" which debated the accuracy of the Census Bureau's value for unemployment.4Dr. Palmer was a critical contributor to the symposium. Palmer was a professor at Wharton, a fellow of the American Statistical Association, a worldwide expert on manpower and labor mobility, and a consultant with the Office of Statistical Standards.5She argued that "asinglefigure of unemployment, regardless of how it is defined or derived, is inadequate as a basis for selection among [policy] programs. Inherent in the phenomena being measured are so many degrees and kinds of labor force activity that no single definition or classification can adequately summate them."6 With concerns about employment again on the rise, in 1976, Senator Hubert Humphrey joined with Congressman Augustus Hawkins to sponsor legislation promoting full employment.7An amendment to the Federal Reserve Act in 1977 specifically assigned monetary policy responsibility for promoting "the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates," commonly referred to as the dual mandate.8This amendment was followed by the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act, passed in 1978, requiring that the Federal Reserve regularly report to the Congress on how monetary policy was supporting the goals of the act.9 Congressman Hawkins was a prominent advocate of full employment, emphasizing its importance not only for providing a job to every American seeking work, but also for reducing poverty, inequality, discrimination, and crime and improving the quality of life of all people.10A congressman from southern California, Hawkins was one of the founders of the Congressional Black Caucus and played a major role in the drafting of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. He was also an undergraduate economics major. Hawkins's views were influenced by his experience representing the Watts neighborhood in Los Angeles, where depression levels of joblessness persisted even when the nation overall was experiencing good times. He was also influenced by the work of economists such as Robert Browne and Bernard Anderson, which highlighted the persistent disparity between Black and white employment and the connection between elevated Black unemployment and economic challenges facing Black communities.11Hawkins emphasized that "without genuine full employment it would be impossible to eliminate racial discrimination in the provision of job opportunities."12The Humphrey-Hawkins Act noted that "increasing job opportunities and full employment would greatly contribute to the elimination of discrimination based upon sex, age, race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or other improper factors."13 The centrality of achieving full employment for all Americans is as pressing today as it was in 1930, 1946, and 1977. The measurement challenges highlighted by Dr. Gladys Palmer and the racial disparities highlighted by Robert Browne and Bernard Anderson are just as relevant in today's economy. And the statutory dual mandate assigned to monetary policy has ensured an unwavering, strong focus on maximum employment as well as price stability at the Federal Reserve in research and measurement no less than policymaking. The Federal Reserve recently concluded a review of our monetary policy framework, which included extensive outreach to a broad range of people over the course of 2019. In 14Fed Listensevents in communities around the country, we heard testimonials that would have sounded strikingly familiar to Congressman Hawkins. At a time when the national headline unemployment rate was at a multidecade low, community and labor representatives and educators noted "it's always a recession" in their communities.14They challenged whether the overall economy could be characterized as at "full employment" while unemployment remained in the double digits in their communities. Reflecting this input, and in light of persistently below-target inflation, low equilibrium interest rates, and low sensitivity of inflation to resource utilization, we made several important changes to the monetary policy framework. Two changes have particular relevance for the employment leg of the dual mandate.15The new framework calls for monetary policy to seek to eliminateshortfallsof employment from its maximum level, in contrast to the previous approach that called for policy to minimizedeviationswhen employment is too high as well as too low. The new framework also defines the maximum level of employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal assessed through a wide range of indicators. So how should we assess this broad-based and inclusive concept of maximum employment? When discussing aggregate indicators about the labor market, people tend to focus on the headline U-3 measure of the unemployment rate.16Although the unemployment rate is a very informative aggregate indicator, it provides only one narrow measure of where the labor market is relative to maximum employment. Recalling Gladys Palmer's dictum, I would not recommend relying on any single indicator, but rather consulting a variety of indicators that together provide a holistic picture of where we are relative to full employment. So let us start by seeing what insights we gain by disaggregating the unemployment data into different groups of workers. The unemployment rate has improved very rapidly from its peak of 14.8 percent last April to 6.3 percent today. But this number is closer to 6.8 percent when taking into account a substantial number of people on temporary layoff, who have been misclassified as "employed but on unpaid absence" but instead should be counted as unemployed."17 Disaggregating the overall unemployment rate reveals that workers in the lowest wage quartile face Depression-era rates of unemployment of around 23 percent.18In part, this rate likely reflects the concentration of lower-wage jobs in service industries that are strongly reliant on in-person contact, or at least in-person work, while a larger proportion of higher-wage jobs are currently being performed remotely or with reduced levels of in-person contact. There is also important information in the disaggregation of unemployment by different racial and ethnic groups.Figure 1shows the prime-age unemployment rate overall and on a disaggregated basis.19There are notable persistent gaps between different racial and ethnic groups, and the sizes of those gaps tend to vary over the business cycle. For example, historically, the ratio of the Black unemployment rate to the white unemployment rate is around 2 for prime-age workers. On average, a 1 percentage point increase in the white unemployment rate is accompanied by a 2 percentage point increase in the Black unemployment rate. This gap narrows considerably the longer an expansion progresses. At the beginning of 2015, a time when many economists believed the overall unemployment rate had reached its "normal" rate, the gap between the Black and white prime-age unemployment rates stood just under 5 percentage points, roughly at its average level since 1972. By September 2019, that gap had reached a historical minimum of 1.7 percentage points, and the gap between the Hispanic and white prime-age unemployment rates had fallen to 0.3 percentage point. The unemployment gaps between racial and ethnic groups widened again during the pandemic. Currently, for prime-age individuals, the gaps between the white unemployment rate and the Black and Hispanic unemployment rates are roughly 4 percentage points and 3 percentage points, respectively. The unemployment rate obscures important information about people leaving and entering the workforce. Each adult in the population is classified as employed, unemployed, or not in the labor force. The unemployment rate is the number of individuals who are not currently working but are actively looking for a job, divided by the size of the labor force, which includes only those people who are either working or actively seeking work: $$ U = {Unemployed \over Labor Force}.$$ Changes in labor force participation contain important information about the strength of the labor market that is not captured in the unemployment rate. The labor force participation rate (LFPR) is the number of individuals who are either working or are seeking work, divided by the working-age population: $$ LFPR = {Labor Force \over Population}.$$ When we take into consideration the more than 4 million workers who have left the labor force since the pandemic started, as well as misclassification, the unemployment rate is close to 10 percent currently—much higher than the headline unemployment rate of 6.3 percent—and similar to the peak unemployment rate following the financial crisis. This is shown inFigure 2. A decline in participation by prime-age women is an important contributor to the overall participation decline. Some portion of the decline reflects the increase in caregiving work at home with the shutdown of schools and daycare due to COVID-19. On average over the period from November 2020 to January 2021, the fraction of prime-age respondents with children aged 6 to 17 who were out of the labor force for caregiving was about 14 percent, up 1-3/4 percentage points from a year earlier. For mothers, the fraction who were out of the labor force for caregiving was 22.8 percent, an increase of 2.4 percentage points from a year earlier, while for fathers the fraction was 2.2 percent, an increase of about 0.6 percentage point.20If not soon reversed, the decline in the participation rate for prime‑age women could have longer-term implications for household incomes and potential growth.21 While there are long-term structural trends in participation, such as population aging, there are also cyclical dynamics that are important for our assessment of maximum employment. The two panels infigure 3show prime-age unemployment and labor force participation over the previous recession and recovery. Following the onset of the global financial crisis, as the number of unemployed people was rising, the size of the labor force was also contracting, pushing the numerator of the unemployment rate up and the denominator down. When the unemployment rate started to decline at the end of 2010, this decline in part reflected unemployed people dropping out of the labor force through 2013. As the labor market healed further, prime-age LFPR leveled out and started to increase at the end of 2015. The subsequent seemingly modest decline in the unemployment rate from 4.3 at the end of 2015 to 3 percent at the end of 2019 was much more significant, taking into account that more than 3-1/2 million prime-age workers joined or rejoined the labor force during that period. This brings me tofigure 4and the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio, which is the number of individuals employed divided by the working-age population: $$ EPOP = {Employed \over Population}.$$ The EPOP ratio synthesizes the information contained in the unemployment rate and LFPR. For instance, as you can see in figure 4, a decline in participation almost entirely offset the decline in unemployment in 2010 and 2011, leaving the prime-age EPOP ratio essentially flat at 75 percent. The EPOP ratio then improved steadily over the subsequent seven years, moving up to 80.4 percent in late 2019. As the effects of the virus and measures to combat it took hold of the economy, the EPOP ratio plummeted last April, and, after staging a sharp but partial recovery, improvements in the prime-age EPOP ratio have moderated in recent months. A glance back at figure 3 shows that the reductions in employment last spring were accompanied by many prime-age workers leaving the labor force, and the participation rate among prime-age workers has declined further since last May. The prime-age EPOP ratio currently stands at 76.4 percent, well below the 80 percent level that was reached during each of the past two expansions. Figure 5shows the patterns in the EPOP ratio for prime-age workers in different racial and ethnic groups.22Following the Global Financial Crisis, the Black–white EPOP gap opened to more than 10 percentage points in mid-2011 before shrinking to under 5 percentage points as labor markets tightened further during 2018 and 2019. In contrast, the Hispanic–white EPOP gap was smaller than the Black–white gap, and it fluctuated in a much narrower range over the business cycle. During the pandemic, labor market performance as shown by the EPOP measure has been fairly similar for Black and Hispanic prime-age workers and markedly worse than for white workers. Research indicates that Black and Hispanic workers are overrepresented in industries particularly hard hit by the pandemic, such as hotels and restaurants.23It also shows that Black and Hispanic workers are overrepresented in essential industries at lower pay, and that they are significantly less likely to be able to telework.24 Figure 6shows one more EPOP snapshot, this time for prime-age women overall, as well as for Black and white subgroups. Following the financial crisis, a gap opened up between the prime-age EPOP ratios for Black and white women. That gap closed in 2015, and employment for both groups surged over the next four years. Between January 2015 and February 2020, the EPOP ratios for white and Black prime-age women each increased roughly 5 percentage points, reaching historical highs in the months just before the onset of the pandemic. As the pandemic took hold in the subsequent months, once again a gap opened up between the EPOP ratios for white and Black women, though the current gap of roughly 2 percentage points is not as large as in the previous downturn. While the EPOP ratio is a strong indicator of the extensive margin in the labor market, or how many people are working, there is also important information in the intensive margin—that is, how much work each person is doing. The part-time for economic reasons (PTER) indicator shown infigure 7measures those who are working part time because they are unable to find a full-time job or whose hours have been reduced and who would prefer full-time employment.25This indicator is an important measure of labor market slack, which tends to jump rapidly during recessions and improve more slowly than headline unemployment during recoveries. PTER jumped during the financial crisis as workers who were unable to secure full-time employment moved to part-time work, accounting for more than half of the increase in involuntary part-time work during 2008.26 Today there are 6.0 million people working part time who would prefer full-time work, up 1.6 million relative to the pre-COVID level. The Bureau of Labor Statistics has six alternative measures of labor underutilization, the most expansive of which is the U-6 measures, which adds to the headline unemployment rate those employed part time for economic reasons, along with all persons marginally attached to the labor force as a percentage of the civilian labor force. The U-6 measure stood at 11.1 percent in January.27 Figure 8shows the large amount of cyclical variation across PTER for several racial and ethnic groups. The incidence of involuntary part-time work was especially notable for Hispanic workers at the trough of the Great Recession, nearing 12 percent of employment and almost double its rate before the recession. This gap between Hispanic and white PTER narrowed substantially during the recovery and fell to just above 1 percentage point in the summer of 2019. Research indicates that gaps in involuntary part-time employment rates remain for Blacks, as well as Hispanics, relative to whites after controlling for age, education, marital status, and state of residence, although education and occupation can explain a portion of the gap for Hispanics.28 Before concluding, I would like to point to two other labor market indicators that provide useful evidence of the extent of labor market slack. The quits rate, shown infigure 9, is a measure of voluntary separations that provides information about how confident people are that they will be successful in finding a new job they prefer and, relatedly, of how aggressively firms are pursuing talent.29Research indicates that the quits rate and wage growth are highly correlated, suggesting that these voluntary job-to-job transitions reflect individuals moving up a "job ladder" to higher-paying jobs.30The quits rate fell rapidly during the 2008 recession as workers' options became more limited, then recovered slowly, only surpassing its pre–financial crisis level of roughly 2.5 percent in 2018. In contrast, the bounceback from the pandemic trough has been much more robust, with quits already reaching 2.6 percent in December. As undergraduates, the quits rate may soon become relevant to you, as research indicates that job-to-job transitions are most frequent for young workers and that this measure has trended down in recent decades.31 Finally, measures of compensation are closely monitored for evidence on labor market slack.Figure 10shows the 12-month growth rate of the employment cost index for total compensation for private industry workers (ECI). Just as quits fell during the Great Recession, so did the ECI. About two years after the onset of the financial crisis, the ECI moved up slightly in 2010 and then remained essentially flat at an annual growth rate of 2 percent over a five-year period between 2010 and 2015. There was a pickup of the ECI at the end of 2015, which coincided with the turning point in the prime-age LFPR. Even so, the growth rate of the ECI did not return to the levels experienced before 2008. Unlike the other indicators I have discussed, the pandemic appears to have made fairly little imprint on the ECI. The ECI declined slightly over the second and third quarters of 2020 and moved up in the fourth quarter. It is difficult to draw any firm conclusions from these developments; while the ECI is not as susceptible to composition effects as some other measures, smaller composition effects are still possible.32 So, what conclusions can we draw from this high-level overview of a variety of labor market indicators, their current readings, and their performance in the previous expansion? First, the headline unemployment rate by itself can obscure important dimensions of labor market slack, so it is important to heed Dr. Palmer's dictum and consult a broad set of aggregated and disaggregated measures. Second, groups that have faced the greatest challenges often make important labor market gains late in an expansion, consistent with Augustus Hawkins's emphasis on the importance of full employment for all Americans. So where does this leave us today? Jobs are still down by 10 million relative to pre-COVID levels, and COVID has disproportionately harmed certain sectors, groups of workers, businesses, and states and localities, leading to a K-shaped recovery. The fiscal support that is enacted and expected will provide assistance to vulnerable households, small businesses, and localities and a significant boost to activity when vaccinations are sufficiently widespread to support a reopening of in-person services. Monetary policy will continue to provide support by keeping borrowing costs for households and businesses low. The assessment of shortfalls from broad-based and inclusive maximum employment will be a critical guidepost for monetary policy, alongside indicators of realized and expected inflation. The Federal Open Market Committee has said it expects the policy rate to remain in the current target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. It has noted that asset purchases will continue at least at the current pace until substantial further progress has been made toward the maximum-employment and inflation goals. In assessing substantial further progress, I will be looking for sustained improvements in realized and expected inflation and examining a range of indicators to assess shortfalls from maximum employment. I will be looking for indicators that show the healing in the labor market is broad based, rather than focusing on the narrow aggregate U-3 unemployment rate, in light of the significant decline in labor force participation since the spread of COVID and the extremely elevated unemployment rate for workers in the lowest wage quartile. For nearly four decades, monetary policy was guided by a strong presumption that accommodation should be reduced preemptively when the unemployment rate nears its normal rate in anticipation that high inflation would otherwise soon follow. But changes in economic relationships over the past decade have led trend inflation to run persistently somewhat below target and inflation to be relatively insensitive to resource utilization. With these changes, our new monetary policy framework recognizes that removing accommodation preemptively as headline unemployment reaches low levels in anticipation of inflationary pressures that may not materialize may result in an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many Americans. It may curtail progress for racial and ethnic groups that have faced systemic challenges in the labor force, which is particularly salient in light of recent research indicating that additional labor market tightening is especially beneficial for these groups when it occurs in already tight labor markets, compared with earlier in the labor market cycle.33Instead, the shortfalls approach means that the labor market will be able to continue to improve absent high inflationary pressures or an unmooring of inflation expectations to the upside. Inflation remains very low, and although various measures of inflation expectations have picked up recently, they remain within their recent historical ranges. PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation may temporarily rise to or above 2 percent on a 12-month basis in a few months when the low March and April price readings from last year fall out of the 12-month calculation, and we could see transitory inflationary pressures reflecting imbalances if there is a surge of demand that outstrips supply in certain sectors when the economy opens back up. While I will carefully monitor inflation expectations, it will be important to see a sustained improvement in actual inflation to meet our average inflation goal. Today the economy remains far from our goals in terms of both employment and inflation, and it will take some time to achieve substantial further progress. I look forward to the time when this K-shaped recovery becomes a broad-based and inclusive recovery and when vaccinations are widespread, the services sector springs back to life, and all Americans enjoy the benefits of full employment. I cannot think of a more meaningful time to be studying economics or a more important time to be thinking about the different ways to assess our shared goal of full employment. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis, Mark Carlson, Christopher Nekarda, Edward Nelson, Ivan Vidangos, and Nicholas Zevanove of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing these materials. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. From 1930 to 1940, the unemployment rate averaged 18 percent by one estimate. See G.J. Santoni (1986), "The Employment Act of 1946: Some History Notes,"Review(Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), vol. 68 (November), pp. 5–16.Return to text 3. The language of the act (quoted text in section 2) is available through FRASER on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis website athttps://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/employment-act-1946-1099. In 1945, the staff at the Federal Reserve Board wrote a series of Postwar Economic Studies on the economic effects of demobilization. The first study notes that "jobs are the main channel through which national welfare reaches the individual." See Emanuel Alexandrovich Goldenweiser (1945), "Jobs," in Frank R. Garfield, Emanuel Alexandrovich Goldenweiser, Everett Einar Hagen, and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, eds.,Jobs, Production, and Living Standards (Baltimore: Waverly Press), p. 1.Return to text 4. For an introduction to the symposium, see Seymour E. Harris (1950), "Introduction,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 32 (February), p. 49.Return to text 5. See Gertrude Bancroft McNally (1967), "Gladys L. Palmer, 1895–1967,"American Statistician,vol. 21 (December), p. 35.Return to text 6. See Gladys L. Palmer (1950), "Unemployment Statistics as a Basis for Employment Policy,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 32 (February), pp. 70–74 (quoted text on p. 70).Return to text 7. For a discussion of the evolution of the Federal Reserve's statutory responsibilities, see Ben S. Bernanke (2013), "A Century of U.S. Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability," speech delivered at "The First 100 Years of the Federal Reserve: The Policy Record, Lessons Learned, and Prospects for the Future," a conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.Return to text 8. As noted by Frederic Mishkin, "Because long-term interest rates can remain low only in a stable macroeconomic environment, these goals are often referred to as thedual mandate; that is, the Federal Reserve seeks to promote the two coequal objectives of maximum employment and price stability." See Frederic S. Mishkin (2007) "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10 (quoted text in paragraph 3).Return to text 9. A few other central banks have an explicit employment mandate that has the same weight as their price-stability mandate, such as the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. For most central banks, price stability is the single objective of monetary policy (Bank of Canada, Riksbank, and Bank of Japan) or the priority objective (for example, European Central Bank and Bank of England). Economic research suggests that inflation outcomes have been as good, or better, in the United States compared with jurisdictions in which employment either is not a monetary policy objective or is subordinate to price stability. See Eric S. Rosengren (2014), "Should Full Employment Be a Mandate for Central Banks?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 46, suppl. 2 (October), pp. 169–82.Return to text 10. See Helen Lachs Ginsburg (2012), "Historical Amnesia: The Humphrey-Hawkins Act, Full Employment and Employment as a Right,"Review of Black Political Economy,vol. 39 (October), pp.121–36.Return to text 11. See Bernard E. Anderson (2008), "Robert Browne and Full Employment,"Review of Black Political Economy,vol. 35 (January), pp. 91–101.Return to text 12. See Augustus F. Hawkins (1975), "Full Employment to Meet America's Needs,"Challenge,vol. 18 (November/December), pp. 20–28.Return to text 13. The complete original language of the act (quoted text in section 2B (4)) is available through FRASER on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis website athttps://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/full-employment-balanced-growth-act-humphrey-hawkins-act-1034.Return to text 14. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, June).Return to text 15. See Lael Brainard (2021), "Full Employment in the New Monetary Policy Framework," speech delivered at the Inaugural Mike McCracken Lecture on Full Employment, sponsored by the Canadian Association for Business Economics (via webcast), January 13.Return to text 16. This measure is the number of unemployed persons divided by the size of the labor force. People in both categories must be 16 years of age or older.Return to text 17. Since March 2020, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has instructed its household survey interviewers to classify employed persons who are absent from work due to temporary, pandemic-related business closures or cutbacks as being unemployed on temporary layoff. During this period, however, some workers affected by the pandemic who should have been classified as unemployed on temporary layoff were instead misclassified as employed but not at work. Each month, the BLS provides an estimate of the likely size of this effect on the unemployment rate. More information is available on the BLS website athttps://www.bls.gov/covid19/employment-situation-covid19-faq-january-2021.htm.Return to text 18. For more information on this analysis, see the box "Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),Monetary Policy Report(Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp. 12–14.Return to text 19. Prime age refers to ages 25 to 54. I focus on this age range because of how important those working years are for individuals' overall careers and because labor market metrics calculated over workers in this age range help control for the aging of the population.Return to text 20. The percentages are staff calculations based on the microdata from the January Current Population Survey. For more information on this analysis, see the box "Disparities in Job Loss during the Pandemic" in Board of Governors,Monetary Policy Report,pp. 12–14, in note 19.Return to text 21. See Olivia Lofton, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Lily Seitelman (2021) "Parents in a Pandemic Labor Market," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2021-04. (February) (2020), and Lael Brainard, "Achieving a Broad-Based and Inclusive Recovery," speech delivered at "Post-COVID—Policy Challenges for the Global Economy," Society of Professional Economists Annual Online Conference, October 21.Return to text 22. The Bureau of Labor Statistics makes disaggregated EPOP data from the Current Population Survey available through online tools found on the bureau's website athttps://www.bls.gov/data.Return to text 23. See Connor Maxwell and Danyelle Solomon (2020), "The Economic Fallout of the Coronavirus for People of Color," Center for American Progress, April 14.Return to text 24. See Hye Jin Rho, Hayley Brown, and Shawn Fremstad (2020),A Basic Demographic Profile of Workers in Frontline Industries(PDF)(Washington: Center for Economic and Policy Research, April).Return to text 25. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, this category includes people who gave an economic reason when asked why they worked 1 to 34 hours during the survey's reference week. Their usual hours of work may be either full or part time. Economic reasons include the following: slack work, unfavorable business conditions, inability to find full-time work, and seasonal declines in demand. People who usually work part time and were at work part time during the reference week must indicate that they want and are available for full-time work to be classified as part time for economic reasons.Return to text 26. For more information, see Tomaz Cajner, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner (2014), "Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14).Return to text 27. Persons marginally attached to the labor force are those who currently are neither working nor looking for work but indicate that they want and are available for a job and have looked for work sometime in the past 12 months.Return to text 28. See Tomaz Cajner, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017), "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text 29. See the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, which can be found on the Bureau of Labor Statistics website athttps://www.bls.gov/jlt/home.htm.Return to text 30. See R. Jason Faberman and Alejandro Justiniano (2015),"Job Switching and Wage Growth,"Chicago Fed Letter 337 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago).Return to text 31. For evidence that job-to-job transition is utilized most when young, and that job dynamism for the young has declined, see Canyon Bosler and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau (2016), "Job-to-Job Transitions in an Evolving Labor Market," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-34 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November).Return to text 32. For example, the ECI data are assembled at an industry-occupation level of granularity. If at the outset of the pandemic, firms in a particular industry laid off their newest, lowest-paid staff in a particular occupational category first, the compositional change could lead compensation in that industry and occupation to increase on average.Return to text 33. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 333–75.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings on January 19 and January 27, 2021. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 26-27, 2021. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 26-27, 2021:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Conference for Community Bankers sponsored by the American Bankers Association (via prerecorded video) Good morning. I want to thank the American Bankers Association for inviting me to speak to you today. Two years ago, I gave my first speech as a Federal Reserve governor at this conference in San Diego, and it is always great to be with you—even if remotely from our recording studio at the Board. It's fair to say that a lot has happened over the past two years. It is an understatement to say that the COVID-19 pandemic has created significant challenges inside and outside the banking sector. Bankers significantly adapted operations to continue serving their communities and customers. You overcame staffing challenges and other hurdles, kept the virtual doors open, worked with your customers, and provided assistance to workers and businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program. Those efforts have made, and continue to make, a huge difference in the lives of many people affected by the pandemic, and I thank you. Since becoming a member of the Federal Reserve Board, I have made it a priority to enhance the Federal Reserve's dialogue with community bankers. I have embarked on an effort to meet with the leaders of every community bank and regional bank supervised by the Federal Reserve. This valuable interaction helps build an understanding of issues affecting small and regional banks, support supervisory decision-making, and shape some of my perspective. It has also helped the Federal Reserve identify initiatives to support the vital role of community banks in serving the financial needs of communities. Today, I would like to share my approach to supervision and regulation, which has helped guide the Fed's efforts to improve oversight of community banks over the past few years and shaped our priorities for 2021 and beyond. In most cases, my points about banking regulation also apply to supervision. I will then focus on several Federal Reserve initiatives that are underway to support community banks during the pandemic and into the future. The first principle is fundamental to regulation but sometimes bears repeating—regulation should always strike the right balance. For banking regulation, that means a balance between actions that promote safety and soundness and actions that promote an acceptable and manageable level of risk-taking. The challenge is doing neither too little to be effective to achieve the public benefit of government oversight, nor too much to prevent the regulated businesses from meeting their customers' needs. Some regulation is appropriate and necessary but striking the right balance means that at some point regulation can go too far and end up reducing the public's welfare. In recent years, the Federal Reserve and other agencies have made oversight more effective by better differentiating prudential regulation and supervision based on the asset size of banks, the complexity of their activities, and the related risks they pose to the financial system. This is especially important for community banks, most of which managed risks well before and during the 2008 financial crisis and have managed their risks well since. Achieving these principles also requires following consumer protection laws and regulations, including fair lending laws, to ensure fairness and broad access to credit and financial services that enable economic opportunity for individuals and communities. The second principle is that the regulatory framework should be effective, but also efficient, and that means assessing the impact of the requirements. For the Federal Reserve, it means that we consider both a rule's benefit to safety and soundness and any potential negative effect, including limiting the availability of credit and services to the public, and the implications of compliance costs on banks. The wisdom in this approach is evident when considering the effect of a regulation on community banks and their role in providing financial services to their communities. Community banks have often been one of the few or only sources of credit and financial services to their customers. Their smaller operational scale relies on fewer staff to reach a more disbursed customer base with limited resources for compliance activities. Regulations should consider the potential impact on the availability of services in a community, as well as the costs to the bank of implementing a rule, particularly in more rural locations. It is necessary that a full and careful practical analysis of costs and benefits be a part of every rulemaking. The third principle is that regulation and supervision should be consistent, transparent, and fair. Regulators are obligated by law to act in this manner, and it also makes good practical sense. These principles enhance safety and soundness and consumer compliance by making sure supervisory expectations are clear and that banks understand and respect the regulatory requirements. Supervisors should not and cannot be everywhere at every moment. But they should be available to provide clarification or answer questions when needed. A clear understanding of the rules and our expectations and a respect for the reasonable application of them is an effective approach to ensure effective compliance. By promoting respect and trust between regulators and the supervised institution, banks are more likely to communicate throughout the examination cycle to inform supervisors of changes they may be considering or challenges they may be facing and how best to resolve or approach them from a regulatory perspective. A final principle that flows from consistency, transparency, and fairness is that rules and supervisory judgments must have a legitimate prudential purpose, and in the majority of cases must not be solely punitive. The goal should be to encourage sound business practices and activities by supervised institutions. By clearly communicating our objectives, we build respect for the rules and make it more likely that any remedial actions against an institution will not be necessary because we encourage compliance through our supervisory approach. When a supervisory action or formal enforcement action is required to address violations at an institution, those actions should be framed in a way that seeks to promote safe, sound, and fair practices and not simply as punishment. These principles that guide my approach to regulation and supervision are consistent with many of the major steps that the Federal Reserve has taken to improve community bank oversight since the implementation of the rules following the 2008 financial crisis. Some predate my arrival at the Fed, and some I have played a significant role in achieving. Most of these actions involve tailoring rules that treated community banks in the same way as larger, more complex institutions. For example, the Volcker rule was aimed at curbing proprietary trading by large banks, but it ended up creating significant compliance costs for community banks, which are not involved in this type of trading. Many of the most important improvements to the Federal Reserve's regulatory framework involve tailoring rules to fit to the size, business model, and risk profiles of community banks. For example, we raised the asset threshold for small banks to qualify for an 18-month exam cycle and similarly raised the threshold for small bank holding companies to be exempted from consolidated risk-based capital rules. The concept of tailoring is also expressed in our community bank supervisory framework, which has been updated to implement the Bank Exams Tailored to Risk (BETR) program. The BETR program allows examiners to identify higher and lower risk activities and, in turn, streamline the examination process for lower risk community banks, thereby reducing burden. In fact, Federal Reserve examiners have tailored examinations by spending approximately 65 percent less time on low/moderate risk state member bank exams than they do on high-risk exams. We also implemented the community bank leverage ratio that allows institutions to opt out of risk-based capital requirements. The Federal Reserve and the other agencies also raised the threshold for when an appraisal is required for residential real estate loans and tailored safety-and-soundness examinations of community and regional state member banks to reflect the levels of risk present and minimize regulatory burden for banks. These improvements in regulation and supervision have helped right the balance I spoke of earlier between safety and soundness and consumer protection, on the one hand, and the ability to provide financial services and best meet the needs of their customers. We have also considered the impact of our actions, seeking to revise rules that impose significant costs to community banks but provide limited benefit to safety and soundness, consumer protection, or financial stability. As a part of this approach, I have also prioritized efforts to improve the consistency, transparency, and reasonableness of regulation and supervision. One of those efforts is promoting greater consistency in supervisory practices across the Federal Reserve System. For example, we are actively working to improve the timeliness of providing banks with consumer compliance exam findings. Further, we are exploring ways to strengthen our ability to understand, monitor, and analyze the risks that are affecting community banks. A key aspect of consistency is ensuring the same supervisory approach and outcomes for similarly situated institutions, with the goal of ensuring, for example, that a "one" composite or component rating in a particular region would be the same for an institution with similar activities and practices in another region. This applies to all areas of our supervisory responsibility, whether safety and soundness, consumer compliance, or analyses of financial stability risk. I'd like to expand on one important area of focus, which is essential to the future success of the community banking sector: accessible innovation and technology integration. This subject is one that I speak about frequently with stakeholders and our staff at the Board. We are committed to developing a range of tools that will create pathways for banks to develop and pursue potential partnerships with fintech companies. This includes clearer guidance on third-party risk management, a guide on sound due diligence practices, and a paper on fintech-community bank partnerships and related considerations. These tools will serve as a resource for banks looking to innovate through fintech partnerships. Technological developments and financial market evolution are quickly escalating competition in the banking industry, and our approach to analyzing the competitive effects of mergers and acquisitions needs to keep pace. The Board's framework for banking antitrust analysis hasn't changed substantially over the past couple of decades. I believe we should consider revisions to that framework that would better reflect the competition that smaller banks face in an industry quickly being transformed by technology and non-bank financial companies. As part of this effort, we have engaged in conversations and received feedback from community banks about the Board's competitive analysis framework and its impact on their business strategies and long-term growth plans. We are in the process of reviewing our approach, and we are specifically considering the unique market dynamics faced by small community banks in rural and underserved areas. Soon after the pandemic began early last year, the Federal Reserve took several actions to support community banks and their ability to help affected customers. We paused examinations and issued supervisory guidance that made it clear that we would not criticize or take public enforcement actions against a bank that was taking prudent steps to help customers and making good faith efforts to comply with regulations. This certainty of regulatory treatment created an environment that built trust between regulators and bankers. It enabled banks to continue to meet the needs of their customers who were struggling with circumstances through no fault of their own. Let me conclude by again commending the important role that community banks have played in providing financial services during these challenging times. You responded quickly to the needs of your customers and communities to provide financial services with limited, if any, interruption. You persevered to implement the largest proportion of Paycheck Protection Program funds to small businesses, whether they were your existing customers or new customers. These relationships are the hallmark of community banking, and as we look toward the future, community banks will continue to play an essential role in supporting customers, delivering financial services, and providing resources to their communities and customers. Let me stop here and thank the organizers for another opportunity to speak to you at this important conference. I look forward to your questions, Rob. Governor Bowman on the Outlook for Community Banking
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., on February 24, 2021. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide support and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to households, businesses, and communities. Today I will review the current economic situation before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. The resurgence in COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths in recent months is causing great hardship for millions of Americans and is weighing on economic activity and job creation. Following a sharp rebound in economic activity last summer, momentum slowed substantially, with the weakness concentrated in the sectors most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus. In recent weeks, the number of new cases and hospitalizations has been falling, and ongoing vaccinations offer hope for a return to more normal conditions later this year. However, the economic recovery remains uneven and far from complete, and the path ahead is highly uncertain. Household spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including leisure and hospitality. In contrast, household spending on goods picked up encouragingly in January after moderating late last year. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. The overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due in part to unprecedented fiscal and monetary actions, which have provided essential support to many households, businesses, and communities. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed. Over the three months ending in January, employment rose at an average monthly rate of only 29,000. Continued progress in many industries has been tempered by significant losses in industries such as leisure and hospitality, where the resurgence in the virus and increased social distancing have weighed further on activity. The unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.3 percent in January, and participation in the labor market is notably below pre-pandemic levels. Although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, millions of Americans remain out of work. As discussed in the FebruaryMonetary Policy Report,the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers and for African Americans, Hispanics, and other minority groups. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices partially rebounded over the rest of last year. However, for some of the sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. While we should not underestimate the challenges we currently face, developments point to an improved outlook for later this year. In particular, ongoing progress in vaccinations should help speed the return to normal activities. In the meantime, we should continue to follow the advice of health experts to observe social-distancing measures and wear masks. Monetary PolicyI will now turn to monetary policy. In the second half of last year, the Federal Open Market Committee completed our first-ever public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. We undertook this review because the U.S. economy has changed in ways that matter for monetary policy. The review's purpose was to identify improvements to our policy framework that could enhance our ability to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives. The review involved extensive outreach to a broad range of people and groups through a series ofFed Listensevents. As described in the FebruaryMonetary Policy Report,in August, the Committee unanimously adopted its revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Our revised statement shares many features with its predecessor. For example, we have not changed our 2 percent longer-run inflation goal. However, we did make some key changes. Regarding our employment goal, we emphasize that maximum employment is a broad and inclusive goal. This change reflects our appreciation for the benefits of a strong labor market, particularly for low- and moderate-income communities. In addition, we state that our policy decisions will be informed by our "assessments ofshortfallsof employment from its maximum level" rather than by "deviationsfrom its maximum level."1This change means that we will not tighten monetary policy solely in response to a strong labor market. Regarding our price-stability goal, we state that we will seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. This means that, following periods when inflation has been running below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. With this change, we aim to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent goal. Well-anchored inflation expectations enhance our ability to meet both our employment and inflation goals, particularly in the current low interest rate environment in which our main policy tool is likely to be more frequently constrained by the lower bound. We have implemented our new framework by forcefully deploying our policy tools. As noted in our January policy statement, we expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current accommodative target range of the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at their current pace until substantial further progress has been made toward our goals. These purchases, and the associated increase in the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, have materially eased financial conditions and are providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. We will continue to clearly communicate our assessment of progress toward our goals well in advance of any change in the pace of purchases. Since the onset of the pandemic, the Federal Reserve has been taking actions to support more directly the flow of credit in the economy, deploying our emergency lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. Although the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) facilities are no longer open to new activity, our other facilities remain in place. We understand that our actions affect households, businesses, and communities across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you, I am happy to take your questions. 1. Italics have been added for emphasis.Return to text
Governor Lael Brainard At the "2021 IIF U.S. Climate Finance Summit: Financing a Pro Growth Pro Markets Transition to a Sustainable, Low-Carbon Economy" hosted by the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. I want to thank the Institute of International Finance for inviting me to join this discussion. Let me start by noting that these are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.1 Climate change is already imposing substantial economic costs and is projected to have a profound effect on the economy at home and abroad.2Future financial and economic impacts will depend on the frequency and severity of climate-related events and on the nature and the speed at which countries around the world transition to a greener economy.3 Climate change and the transition to a low-carbon economy create both risks and opportunities for the financial sector. Financial institutions that do not put in place frameworks to measure, monitor, and manage climate-related risks could face outsized losses on climate-sensitive assets caused by environmental shifts, by a disorderly transition to a low-carbon economy, or by a combination of both. Conversely, robust risk management, scenario analysis, and forward planning can help ensure financial institutions are resilient to climate-related risks and well-positioned to support the transition to a more sustainable economy. Making Progress on Climate ChangeThe economic consequences of climate change are already in evidence. There is growing evidence that extreme weather events related to climate change are on the rise—droughts, wildfires, hurricanes, and heat waves are all becoming more common.4Natural disasters are a major source of losses to households and businesses; one study finds that natural disasters have resulted in more than $5.2 trillion in losses globally since 1980, more than 70 percent of which was not insured.5Extreme weather events have been shown to disrupt corporate supply chains and impact corporate profitability.6Chronic flooding and sea level rise negatively impact property values.7These events are expected to increase in frequency and severity over time, which could impact borrower creditworthiness or collateral values. With climate-related risks on the rise, governments, regulators, corporations, and investors are mobilizing to accelerate the transition to a greener economy, including through ambitious targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Unanticipated or abrupt shifts in policy, technology, or investor sentiment have the potential to produce abrupt repricing events that could result in losses on financial institution balance sheets. Over a longer horizon, such shifts could also have implications for their business strategies. Climate change can affect the financial system through both of these channels. "Physical risks" refer to damages caused by an increase in the frequency or severity of weather events or other climate shifts. "Transition risks" arise from changes in policy, technology, or consumer behavior that lead to a lower-carbon economy. These physical and transition risks could materialize as traditional financial risks to supervised institutions, including through increased credit, market, operational, reputational, and liquidity risk. We are already seeing financial institutions responding to climate-related risks by encouraging borrowers to adapt to and manage the risks associated with a changing climate, responding to investors' demands for climate-friendly portfolios, and funding critical private-sector initiatives to move toward more climate-friendly business models.8As noted by members of our Federal Advisory Council, "[t]here has been increasing awareness among financial institutions of the need to define and develop risk management frameworks that incorporate these [climate-related financial] risks into strategic decision making on multiple levels, including investment approaches and the long-term structuring of portfolios."9 Supervisors have a responsibility to ensure that financial institutions are resilient to all material risks—including those related to climate change—both currently and into the future. It is essential that financial institutions—and the financial sector as a whole—are resilient to and prepared for the challenges of climate change. A recent survey of central banks found a large majority view it as appropriate "to act within their existing mandate to mitigate climate-related financial risks" that "could potentially impact the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions and could pose potential financial stability concerns for the financial system."10 Addressing climate-related risks and opportunities, however, will not be easy. It will require a sustained commitment—both from financial institutions and their regulators—to invest in expertise, modeling, and data, and a willingness to learn and improve over time. Climate change presents a number of complex conceptual and practical challenges that must be considered as we work together to develop a framework to ensure financial institutions are resilient to climate-related risks. Despite the challenges, it will be critical to make progress, even if initially imperfect, in order to ensure that financial institutions are resilient to climate-related financial risks and well-positioned for the opportunities associated with the transition to a more sustainable economy. I will touch on a few of the conceptual challenges that will need to be addressed as we consider the implications of climate change for our mandated responsibilities and determine how best to incorporate climate-related risks into our supervisory framework.Uncertainty, Data, and DisclosureWhile the scientific evidence for climate change is unequivocal, estimates of the magnitude of climate-related financial risks are highly uncertain.11This uncertainty stems from a number of factors. Predicting the timing and magnitude of physical risk drivers such as hurricanes, wildfires, or droughts is inherently complex. The predicted path of climate change may be nonlinear and may include tipping points or critical thresholds that, when exceeded, can lead to a significant change in the state of the climate system.12There is also transition-related uncertainty associated with policy developments, technological change, and shifts in behavior and preferences. Moreover, the economic and financial market impacts of climate-related risks vary across geographies, sectors, and jurisdictions and depend importantly on the existence of feedback loops. Finally, the long time horizon associated with climate change, the lack of historical data, the potential for sudden shifts in asset valuations, and the paucity of information on the climate-sensitivity of exposures complicate the translation of climate-related risks into measures of credit, market, liquidity, reputational, and operational risks.13 Improved data, disclosures, and modelling techniques will be crucial to reducing uncertainty around the potential magnitude of risks related to climate change. Financial institutions are collecting data and experimenting with scenario analysis and other techniques to better understand the potential impact of climate-related risks to their balance sheets and business models.14Similarly, the Federal Reserve is investing in data and empirical work to analyze the transmission of climate-related risks to the economy and developing methodologies to measure these risks, as are other central banks.15 Financial institutions note that "the development of uniform data standards and metrics for disclosures will be critical to adequately identify and compare climate risks across businesses and sectors."16That underscores the importance of efforts such as the industry-led Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) that work toward consistent climate-related financial disclosures to improve transparency, reduce uncertainty, and help market participants appropriately assess and price climate-related risks and opportunities.17Current voluntary disclosure practices are an important first step, but they are prone to variable quality, incompleteness, and a lack of actionable data.18Ultimately, moving toward standardized, reliable, and mandatory disclosures could provide better access to the data required to appropriately manage risks. Even with improved data and disclosures, uncertainty about the future climate trajectory will remain.19This residual uncertainty should not stand in the way of making prudent investments in risk-management practices in the near term to strengthen the financial sector against climate-related risks. Instead, supervisory approaches should encourage institutions to take the necessary risk-management steps to ensure their business models and strategies are robust to the wide range of potential outcomes that may evolve over time—including the possible use of new tools where appropriate. ToolsClimate-related risks have unique characteristics that may warrant consideration of new approaches to measuring and managing risk, and new or enhanced supervisory tools. Determining whether the existing supervisory toolkit is adequate or if changes are needed will require careful thought and rigorous analysis of the unique aspects of climate risks, including their long-time horizon, variability across geographies and sectors, and data challenges. As always, supervisory approaches will be informed by analytical assessments and transparent discussions. Supervised institutions are beginning to adapt their governance, risk-identification, and risk-management processes, and business models to reflect climate-related risks. It is clear that physical and transition risks could have significantly different impacts on institutions of varying sizes, complexities, and business models, and with exposures to different geographies. Banks have told us that, "prospective guidance and regulation should be (1) designed to assist institutions of all types and sizes to measure, monitor, and disclose the associated financial risks [from climate change]; and (2) tailored to the complexity of specific types of institutions."20 In light of the high uncertainty inherent in estimating climate risks, scenario analysis may be a helpful tool to assess the microprudential and macroprudential implications of climate-related risks under a wide range of assumptions. Climate scenario analysis identifies climate-related physical and transition risk factors facing financial firms, formulates appropriate stresses of those risk factors under different scenarios, and measures their effects on individual firms and the financial system as a whole. To be clear, scenario analysis is distinct from our traditional regulatory stress tests at banks. Scenario analysis is an exploratory exercise that allows banks and supervisors to assess business model resilience to a range of long-run scenarios. It seeks to understand the effects of climate-related risks on a range of financial markets and institutions, as well as the potentially complex dynamics among them. By contrast, traditional stress tests are a regulatory exercise to assess the capital adequacy of banks to specific macroeconomic scenarios and financial market shocks over the short-run. We are closely following the climate scenarios being developed by other central banks and supervisory authorities and engaging with those institutions so we can learn from their experiences. It will be important to think carefully about the potential for scenario analysis to support microprudential and macroprudential objectives and to consider how stress testing and scenario analysis may complement one another. Efficiency and RobustnessThere is unlikely to be a single "right" approach to a challenge as complex as the financial impact of climate change. Microprudential supervisors and regulators generally aim to promote the goals of a safe and sound banking system in the way that is as efficient and effective as possible.21Developing an effective framework is likely to be a complex undertaking in considering the linkages between climate change, the economy and financial markets, and ultimately the risks faced by individual banks. For instance, consider model development and scenario analysis. At first glance, it might appear most efficient and least burdensome to apply a prescriptive approach that specifies the appropriate data and a scenario and leverages a particular credit model to produce a standardized output across firms. Although there are benefits to standardization in some areas such as data and taxonomies, it is not clear a highly prescriptive approach would be the most effective way to ensure financial institutions are well-prepared for the range of possible impacts of climate change, even if the execution burden is low. Ultimately, the outcomes are likely to be more robust if we innovate and experiment, and leverage a range of complementary approaches being developed in both the private and the public sectors.22In considering the trade-off here, we should strive for an appropriate balance that allows for innovation and learning across the public and private sectors, iterating in the most effective way possible. The Path AheadWhile recognizing the challenges, the Federal Reserve is making strides in better understanding climate-related risks and determining how best to incorporate them into our supervisory framework. The Federal Reserve announced last month the creation of a Supervision Climate Committee (SCC).23It will strengthen the Federal Reserve's capacity to identify and assess financial risks from climate change. The SCC will work to develop an appropriate program to ensure the resilience of supervised firms to climate-related financial risks. It will leverage expertise from across the Federal Reserve System to develop a robust, tailored program that reflects risk differences across types of firms and geographies. The SCC is focusing on engagement with the private and official sectors to understand the potential impact of climate-related risks. It is engaging with a diverse group of supervised institutions and industry groups to learn how banks of different sizes, with different business models and different geographic exposures are considering both climate risks and opportunities and what they are doing to prepare for the transition to a low-carbon economy. We are learning a great deal from these discussions, and we look forward to continued engagement with the industry on this topic. The microprudential work of the SCC is one part of our efforts to take into account climate-related risks in carrying out the responsibilities Congress has assigned to us. The SCC will work with staff in our financial stability, community development, international coordination, and research and data areas to build a coordinated approach to integrating climate-related risks where they affect our responsibilities. The Federal Reserve is engaging with colleagues from other regulatory agencies, central banks, and standard-setting bodies. At home, this includes exploring with members of the U.S. Global Change Research Program the ways additional scientific data, models, and other information would be used to expand our analysis of weather-related disasters and climate-related risks. Climate change is a global challenge, and we recognize the benefit of collaboration across the official sector, while also taking into account important differences across jurisdictions. The Federal Reserve is co-chairing the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Risks (TFCR).24Having completed a stock-take of members' existing regulatory and supervisory initiatives on climate-related financial risks, the TFCR is now focused on finalizing by midyear a report exploring the transmission channels of climate risks to the banking system and a report that describes the methodologies used by banks and supervisors to measure these risks. Next, the TFCR will turn its attention to developing supervisory practices to mitigate climate-related financial risks where there are potential gaps in the Basel framework. Already, many banks are incorporating supervisory expectations with regard to management of climate-related risks in foreign jurisdictions, for instance from the European Central Bank and the UK Prudential Regulatory Authority.25The TCFR's work will be helpful in strengthening supervisory collaboration across jurisdictions, which is important to banks that are internationally active. We also participate in the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) work on climate change. Building on previous reports on climate-related risk-transmission channels in the financial system, with a particular focus on amplification mechanisms and cross-border effects, the FSB is now assessing the availability of data through which climate-related risks to financial stability could be monitored, as well as any data gaps.26In addition, the FSB is exploring ways to promote globally comparable, high-quality and auditable standards of disclosure based on the recommendations in the TCFD. The Federal Reserve recently became a full member of the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), a network of more than 80 central banks and supervisory authorities from around the world that focuses on sharing research and identifying best practices to ensure the financial system is resilient to climate-related risks. Through the NGFS, we are engaged in work on the microprudential and macrofinancial impacts of climate change, trends in green finance, data gaps, and research. In wrestling with the many complexities and challenges related to climate change, there are likely to be significant opportunities for collaboration with the private and official sectors. These are not easy problems, and they will not have easy solutions. We will undoubtedly reach better outcomes if we tackle these challenges through open dialogue, information sharing, and transparency. Together, we can help ensure the financial system is resilient to the risks that arise from climate change and well-positioned to support the transition to a greener economy. 1. I am grateful to Morgan Lewis and Kevin Stiroh of the Federal Reserve for their assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. U.S. Global Change Research Program,Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II, D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.) (Washington: USGCRP, 2018).Return to text 3. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), "Summary for Policymakers" in:Global Warming of 1.5°C: An IPCC Special Report, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, T. Waterfield (eds.), 2018; on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty.Return to text 4. See World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Task Team,Global Warming and Hurricanes: An Overview of Current Research Results(Princeton: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, 2020); and The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation(Geneva: IPCC, 2012), 44–8.Return to text 5. Munich Re, "Risks Posed by Natural Disasters," 2020.Return to text 6. See, for example, Jean-Noel Barrot and Julien Sauvagnat, "Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks,"The Quarterly Journal of Economics131 (3): 1,543–92.Return to text 7. Also Francesc Ortega and Süleyman Taspinar, "Rising Sea Levels and Sinking Property Values: The Effects of Hurricane Sandy on New York's Housing Market."Journal of Urban Economics,2018, 106: 81–100.Return to text 8. See, for example, COP26 Private Finance Hub, "Building a Private Financial System for Net Zero (PDF)," 2020. Also, Taskforce on Scaling Voluntary Carbon Markets, "Final Report (PDF)," January 2021; Climate Policy Initiative, "Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2019," November 7, 2019.Return to text 9.Federal Advisory Council (FAC) Record of Meeting (PDF), (February 4, 2021).Return to text 10. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,Climate-Related Financial Risks: A Survey on Current Initiatives(PDF), April 2020.Return to text 11. USGCRP, "Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Report," U.S. Global Change Research Program.Return to text 12. IPCC,Impacts of 1.5⁰C Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems,2018, pp. 262.Return to text 13. Glenn D. Rudebusch, "Climate Change Is a Source of Financial Risk," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, February 8, 2021.Return to text 14. See, for example, United Nations Environment Programme–Finance Initiative (UNEP-FI), "Extending Our Horizons: Assessing Credit Risk and Opportunity in a Changing Climate" (Geneva: UNEP-FI, April 2018); UNEP-FI, "Beyond the Horizon: New Tools and Frameworks for Transition Risk Assessments from UNEP FI's TCFD Banking Programme," (Geneva: UNEP-FI, October 2020).Return to text 15. See, for example, Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), "Guide to Climate Scenario Analysis for Central Banks and Supervisors (PDF)," June 2020.Return to text 16.Federal Advisory Council (FAC) Record of Meeting (PDF), (February 4, 2021).Return to text 17. Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures,Final Report: Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures(PDF)" (New York: TCFD, June 2017).Return to text 18. See, for example, Pedro Faria, Tony Rooke, and Esben Madsen,Pitfalls of Climate-Related Disclosures(PDF), Climate Disclosure Project.Return to text 19. Patrick Bolton, Morgan Després, Luiz Awazu Pereira da Silva, Frédéric Samama, and Romain Svartzman,The Green Swan: Central Banking and Financial Stability in the Age of Climate Change(Basel: Bank for International Settlements, January 20, 2020).Return to text 20.Federal Advisory Council (FAC) Record of Meeting (PDF), (February 4, 2021).Return to text 21. Kevin J. Stiroh, "Policy Efficiency in Supervision," remarks at Bank Regulation, Lending, and Growth Conference, Bank Policy Institute and Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs, March 1, 2019.Return to text 22. In our supervision of banks' capital stress testing (Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or, CCAR), we learned it was important to avoid "model monoculture" that would expose all firms to the same model risk and uncertainty and could be vulnerable to a single, common failure. Instead, CCAR leverages internal bank models that capture banks' idiosyncratic risks and allows for diversity and innovation of models and risk management tools across the banking sector. See Ben Bernanke, "Stress Testing Banks—What Have We Learned?" speech at "Maintaining Financial Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail" financial markets conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, Georgia, April 8, 2013.Return to text 23. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, "Kevin Stiroh to Step Down as Head of New York Fed Supervision to Assume New System Leadership Role at Board of Governors on Climate," news release, January 25, 2021.Return to text 24. Kevin J. Stiroh, "The Basel Committee's Initiatives on Climate-Related Financial Risks," remarks at the 2020 IIF Annual Membership Meeting," October 14, 2020.Return to text 25. European Central Bank,Guide on Climate-Related and Environmental Risks: Supervisory Expectations Relating to Risk Management and Disclosure(PDF), (Frankfurt: ECB, November 2020); and Bank of England Prudential Regulatory Authority, "Managing Climate-Related Financial Risk—Thematic Feedback from the PRA's Review of Firms' Supervisory Statement 3/19 (SS3/19) Plans and Clarification of Expectations (PDF)," letter, July 1, 2020.Return to text 26. Financial Stability Board,The Implications of Climate Change for Financial Stability(PDF), November 23.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia (via webcast) One of the principal themes of human history—and certainly of economic history—is that of a sudden technological breakthrough originally deployed for one purpose being gradually refined over time until new and better versions of it are eventually deployed for a much broader range of purposes. The breakthrough supplies the drama, but it's the steady incremental improvement over time that makes the greatest difference. The Phoenicians dramatically improved the speed and cargo load of their commercial voyages with the invention of the trireme—massive boats, powered with three tiers of oarsmen, rather than the standard one or two—dispatched from Tyre and Sidon in the service of exploration, commerce, and colonization. But the Greeks improved on the design, bit by bit, and over many years, until they became not commercial vessels ferrying cargo from Carthage to Cádiz, but warships that revolutionized naval combat and enabled Athens—led by the obstinate upstart Themistocles who built a fleet of 200 triremes, the largest navy Greece had ever seen—to challenge and defeat the Persian King. Or, somewhat closer to home, consider the development of radar in World War II. That initial innovation was instrumental in winning the war but continued refinement has led to technologies that can promptly warn us of tornados or even steer our cars. In the world of bank supervision, our equivalent of the trireme has been the stress test. The initial innovation of stress testing gave us an urgently needed tool to measure how much additional capital banks with mounting losses needed to survive the financial crisis more than a decade ago. But because we continued with the refinement, we now have a tool that also helps us to set capital requirements credibly in the banking system, in good times as well as times of financial stress. Today, I'd like to share with you my perspective about how stress testing has enhanced the credibility of our capital adequacy framework, highlight some features of the upcoming stress test, and offer some thoughts on the importance of continued innovation in supervision. In particular, I will discuss how stress testing serves as both a general tool to set bank capital requirements throughout the credit cycle and recently as a specialized tool to provide an analytical grounding for the decisions we have made on capital distributions during the COVID event. Then I will briefly review the recently released scenario for the 2021 test and discuss other changes for the upcoming stress testing cycle. The 2020 Stress TestsWe now use stress testing in two important but different ways: to set capital requirements during normal times and to assess capital adequacy during exigent times. In March of last year, the Board of Governors finalized the stress capital buffer requirement, which uses the Fed's stress test results to set capital requirements for large banks, and by doing so, simplified our overall capital regime. While this new framework has the same goal as the previous Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) framework—using forward-looking analysis to help ensure that banks have sufficient capital to survive a severe recession while still being able to lend to businesses and household—it integrates our stress testing regime with our ongoing capital requirements so that large banks now have a single suite of dynamic and risk-sensitive capital requirements. While that framework is simpler, it is no less stringent than the CCAR framework—a framework that contributed to a more than doubling of the common equity ratio at banks between 2009 and 2019. At the time we made the stress capital buffer final last March, we estimated that the stress capital buffer would have further increased capital requirements for the largest and most complex banks. By design, the new framework better captures systemic risk by requiring those banks to establish a buffer to absorb losses they'd take in a severe recession in addition to their G-SIB surcharges. It is useful here to pause and put stress testing in the context of bank supervision in general. Both supervision and stress testing specifically have roles during normal times as well as times of stress, but those roles are somewhat different depending on the circumstances. Like all supervision, stress testing conducted during normal times of solid economic growth and financial stability is aimed at helping ensure banks remain in safe and sound condition. We use it to set the capital buffers, which give firms incentives to hold capital during normal times, so they are prepared to weather downturns. During periods of economic and financial turmoil, the goals shift to understanding banks' exposure to the turmoil and to ensuring that banks can support households and businesses by continuing to lend. The modern bank stress testing regime was born in the solvency crisis of 2009 but remains a flexible tool that can be used to understand the implications of a range of macroeconomic and financial conditions. That includes conditions that few could have imagined, such as those that descended last spring. The temporary shutdown of large segments of the economy caused an unprecedentedly large and swift drop in economic activity. Equally unprecedented was the degree of uncertainty, both downside and upside, about how the economy would progress throughout the remainder of 2020. We responded to that abrupt change in environment by adapting stress testing to conduct a sensitivity analysis, an application of the stress testing models used to inform the Board of Governors about risks to bank solvency during those rapidly changing conditions. The sensitivity analysis we conducted was possible because we routinely collect standardized data from banks on their exposures and have developed our own loss and income models at the Fed. Thus, we were able to conduct this analysis purely internally, without putting additional burdens on banks during an already-difficult time. That analysis used the same models as the regular stress test, but we made several changes with the goal of gaining a real-time understanding of the implications for bank capital of quite plausible downside scenarios. The sensitivity analysis included three additional scenarios that reflected the potential economic implications of the COVID event, as we understood them at the time. We also incorporated targeted adjustments to account for material changes to bank balance sheets resulting from the COVID event, such as large drawdowns on corporate credit lines. At that time of great uncertainty, this sensitivity analysis helped sharpen our understanding of how banks might fare under the wide range of possible paths of the economy. We published that analysis to bolster public confidence in the financial system by providing a rigorous and timely assessment of the condition and prospects for the banking sector, based on data and well-established analytical methods. The additional analysis gave the public a view into the intellectual underpinnings of the policy actions the Board took, which included special limitations on—but not a complete elimination of—capital distributions and a requirement for all firms to re-assess their capital needs and submit another capital plan in late 2020 in light of the economic uncertainty. The December round of stress tests that followed informed an adjustment to and extension of the distribution limitations into the first quarter of 2021, and we are continuing to use insights from the stress tests as we consider when to lift the limitations. Throughout the COVID event, the stress test has provided analysis necessary to tailor our actions to the risks we faced, and we have used the results from it to provide the public with transparency into the analysis that informs our decisions. The investment we've made in the Fed's own stress test models gave us an extra tool relative to regulators in other jurisdictions, who generally rely on banks' own models for projections of losses and revenues in their supervisory stress tests. While those other jurisdictions cancelled or postponed their scheduled stress tests to avoid putting additional burdens on banks to run models during a period of financial stress, we expanded our internally-run analysis to meet the evolving conditions. We used the opportunity to inform ourselves about the impact of various plausible paths that the recovery might take and to provide the public with more frequent assessments of bank health. And as a result of the measures taken by the Board and the banks, U.S. bank capital levels actually increased last year, despite substantial increases in loan loss reserves—funds that banks set aside to cover expected losses. The aggregate common equity ratio across large banks increased from 12 percent at the end of 2019 to 12.8 percent at the end of 2020. During this same time, large banks built roughly $90 billion in loan loss reserves. It may not have been possible to use stress testing in such a central way had we not done the work to establish its credibility over the past decade. That credibility is built on a foundation of cutting-edge models, which estimate how different bank assets would respond to economic stresses. Our careful execution of those models allows us to confidently disclose detailed results to the public. Those innovations prepared us to adapt quickly and respond to the unprecedented shock associated with the COVID event, which confirmed that stress testing is still effective in these unprecedented times. The Fed's stress testing models are subject to continual development by experts in credit risk measurement, borrower behavior, and financial markets. Like a barometer, the models give us an early warning of stormy financial conditions ahead by distilling bank positions and scenarios into estimates of potential losses and revenues. These models are reviewed by a group of experts inside the Fed but outside the stress testing process that challenges their assumptions, further improving their credibility. The models span all material exposures held by banks, providing a comprehensive assessment of the risks different types of scenarios pose to overall bank capital. Our disclosures of the results stemming from those models, along with transparency about the model assumptions, have given banks, markets, and the broader public a lens through which to understand risk in the system. We have built credibility over time through our consistent and increasingly detailed public disclosures. For nearly a decade, we have published the scenarios and results, and a few years ago we greatly expanded our disclosure of the modeling methodology in an additional annual publication. Looking Ahead to the 2021 Stress TestContinuing in that tradition, two weeks ago we initiated the 2021 stress test with the publication of this cycle's stress scenarios. As we've said many times, the scenarios are not projections or predictions. They are designed according to a longstanding framework that we published after incorporating feedback from the public. This year, the macroeconomic scenario envisions a severe global recession accompanied by a period of heightened stress in U.S. commercial real estate and corporate debt markets. As discussed in recent financial stability reports, the current environment presents unique challenges for those asset classes, and our focus on them in the scenarios is consistent with the salient risks they pose to banks. The scenario layers additional significant stress on top of the stress already absorbed by banks over the past year, with the unemployment rate rising back to nearly 11 percent and stock prices falling more than 50 percent. In March, we will publish the details of the methodologies that underlie our models. This will mark the third year since we enhanced the disclosures to provide significantly more information about the stress testing models relative to earlier years. That information includes ranges of loss rates, estimated by using the models, for actual loans held by CCAR firms; portfolios of hypothetical loans with loss rates estimated by the models; and more detailed descriptions of the models, such as equations and key variables that influence the results of the models. These disclosures enhance the ability of the public to understand and interpret the supervisory stress test results. And as I've noted before, I believe these enhanced disclosures have been a step in the right direction toward striking the right balance between rigor and transparency. They do not reveal everything about our models—lest we find ourselves in a "model monoculture" where supervisors and banks converge on the same sets of risks, ignoring other potential problems. In June we'll publish the firm-level results from the test. Though 2021 is a year in which smaller firms are not subject to the supervisory stress test, the Board recently made final a rule that will allow them to opt in. Should they do so, their results will also be disclosed, and their stress capital buffers will be updated using the stress test results we publish in June. These actions, including greater transparency around our stress testing models and greater flexibility in our stress testing process for smaller firms, represent innovations that I believe help to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of supervision. Future Innovation in Stress TestingAs we look to the future, the Fed must continue to innovate so that stress testing remains effective. In the near term, we must strive to understand the implications of the COVID event on how we measure financial risk. Borrowers are facing unemployment, cash flow disruptions, and continued economic uncertainty. The programs put in place to help those borrowers are critical for our recovery but will further complicate risk modeling as borrower stress may be obscured by temporary stimulus. For example, it is difficult to tell whether a borrower who has continued to make loan payments during the COVID event is able to do so because of stimulus payments or because they have continued to earn income. Borrowers benefitting from temporary forbearance may or may not be able to resume payments once the forbearance ends. Over the longer term, we must continue to sharpen our thinking around the interrelationships between bank risk and broader changes, such as advancing technologies and growth in non-bank finance. Those forces are undoubtedly altering bank risk, and it will take creative and timely research to understand the implications. Our agenda also includes initiatives that could reduce the volatility in the stress test results without sacrificing either their probative value or their rigor. We will continue to explore those possibilities. At the same time, we regularly get calls from the public to review various aspects of our models. For example, in recent years, representatives from an affordable housing group noted that the global market shock for real estate investments also affected certain lower-risk public welfare investments, thereby discouraging investment in affordable housing. We deliberatively studied the issue, concluded that the public welfare investments indeed posed a lower risk to bank capital than the other real estate investments, and adjusted downward the shock we apply to those investments in advance of the 2020 stress test. More recently, we received feedback from banks via appeals of their stress capital buffers. I was encouraged by the fact that a number of the issues the banks raised were already on our research agenda. The banks, however, did raise issues relating to interest rate hedges, loss-sharing agreements, and loans that use fair value option accounting that the Board directed staff to investigate and address promptly. I am hopeful that the feedback we receive from the public as well as our own analysis will help us set the right priorities in our research and development work. But innovation is not just about improving tools like stress testing. It is also about identifying new ways to apply those tools to a broader set of problems faced by the Board, in supervision, and perhaps beyond. The sensitivity analysis I described earlier demonstrates how we are able to adapt and apply a familiar tool in a new way to conduct critical analysis at a critical moment. Drawing on that experience, I believe there is a need for more data and data-driven analysis broadly in supervision, which is related to the larger goal of enhanced transparency. Important aspects of supervision are appropriately private, to protect a bank's confidential business information and to avert speculation about a bank's finances that could be destabilizing. And not every aspect of a supervisor's work can be quantified. But I believe that there is room for supervisors to be more transparent about their analytical processes in general, and more forthcoming about the data used as the basis for supervisory judgments. Stress testing can serve as an example of what may be possible as we explore those avenues. Themistocles saw the possibilities of an evolving technology in a changing world. That applies, too, to the ongoing work of reviewing, adjusting and improving supervision and stress testing to ensure that banks can continue supporting households and businesses in good times and in those that are more challenging.
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Vice Chair Clarida delivered identical remarks to the American Chamber of Commerce in Australia's "Live from America" webinar series on February 24, 2021. It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today.1I look forward to our conversation, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, the Federal Reserve's monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework. Current Economic Situation and OutlookIn the second quarter of last year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression, but economic activity rebounded sharply in the third quarter, supported by a robust and unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy response. More recently, the pace of recovery has moderated in part because of a winter resurgence in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations. A number of macroeconomic data releases have been weaker than expected in recent months. Spending on services has continued to remain well below pre-pandemic levels, particularly in contact-intensive sectors, including travel, leisure, and hospitality. The pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed notably in recent months. Although more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost last spring have been regained, the unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.3 percent in January, and once one factors in the decline in the labor force since the onset of the pandemic and misclassification, the true unemployment rate is closer to 10 percent. Core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation is running at just 1.5 percent, and, for those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, price increases remain subdued. Of course, we have also received some encouraging data. Retail sales stepped up considerably in January, retracing the decline late last year. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment and manufacturing production have also rebounded robustly. And while the economy might not continue to grow at the once-in-a-century 33 percent annualized rate of growth reported in the third quarter of 2020, it is clear that the economy has turned out to be more resilient in adapting to the virus, and more responsive to monetary and fiscal policy support, than many predicted. Indeed, it is worth highlighting that in the baseline projections of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) presented in the latest Summary of Economic Projections, released last December, most of my colleagues and I revised up our outlooks for the economy over the medium term, projecting a relatively rapid return to levels of employment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).2In particular, the median FOMC participant projected in December that by the end of 2023—a little less than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen below 4 percent, and PCE inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels. While the winter surge in new COVID cases and the spread of new variants of the virus are cause for concern as well as a source of downside risk to the very near-term outlook, the welcome news on the development of several effective vaccines and the passage by the Congress in late December of a package of fiscal relief measures indicate to me that the prospects for the economy in 2021 and beyond have brightened and the downside risk to the outlook has diminished. Recent FOMC Decisions and the New Monetary Policy FrameworkAt our most recent FOMC meetings, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. As announced in the September statement and reiterated in the following statements, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.3We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent, and until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, in the December statement, we combined our forward guidance for the federal funds rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month untilsubstantial further progresshas been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The changes to the policy statement that we made over the past few FOMC meetings bring our policy guidance in line with the new framework outlined in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee approved last August.4In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "shortfalls[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations." This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."5While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—which remain unchanged.6 Concluding RemarksWhile our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so as the recovery progresses, it will take some time for economic activity and employment to return to levels that prevailed at the business cycle peak reached last February. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust and rapid as possible. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 3. The statements issued following the September and subsequent FOMC meetings are available, along with other postmeeting statements, on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 4. The statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 5. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.Return to text 6. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.Return to text