The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) today released the public sections of eight large domestic firms' resolution plans, which are required by the Dodd-Frank Act and commonly known as living wills. Resolution plans describe the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. Eight firms were required to submit targeted resolution plans by July 1: Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Citigroup Inc.; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; State Street Corporation; and Wells Fargo & Company. By regulation, resolution plans must be divided into public and confidential sections. To foster transparency, the agencies have required each firm's public section to summarize certain elements of the resolution plan. The public sections of the resolution plans areavailableon the FDIC's and the Federal Reserve's websites.
The federal bank regulatory agencies today requested public comment on proposed guidance designed to help banking organizations manage risks associated with third-party relationships, including relationships with financial technology-focused entities. The proposed guidance is intended to assist banking organizations in identifying and addressing the risks associated with third-party relationships and responds to industry feedback requesting alignment among the agencies with respect to third-party risk management guidance. Banking organizations that engage third parties to provide products or services or to perform other activities remain responsible for ensuring that such outsourced activities are conducted in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including consumer protection laws. Comments must be received within 60 days of the proposed guidance's publication in theFederal Register. Proposed Interagency Guidance on Third-Party Relationships: Risk Management (PDF) Board Memo (PDF)
Governor Lael Brainard At "Rebuilding the Post-Pandemic Economy" 2021 Annual Meeting of the Aspen Economic Strategy Group, Aspen, Colorado The economy is reopening, consumer spending is strong, and hundreds of thousands of workers are finding jobs in the hard-hit leisure and hospitality sector each month. Pent-up demand has outstripped capacity in some sectors, as businesses that had pared back to survive the pandemic are encountering bottlenecks as they rehire and restock.1These mismatches have made it more difficult to interpret the first few months of reopening data. The second quarter of 2021 saw a large wave of demand buoyed by fiscal transfers, resulting in annualized real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) growth of 11.8 percent. Real gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of 6.5 percent in the second quarter of 2021, slightly less than many forecasters had projected, as that strong consumer demand outstripped production, resulting in a significant decline in inventories. The tailwinds to growth from the fiscal stimulus during the first half are shifting to headwinds that will continue through the remainder of 2021 and 2022. Even so, pent-up consumption and full reopening are expected to more than offset fiscal headwinds in the second half such that PCE is expected to grow at a robust rate, and growth is expected to remain strong through the remainder of the year. By the end of the year, the U.S. economy is expected to achieve average annualized growth of 2.2 percent since the onset of COVID-19—slightly above most estimates of longer-term potential output growth. In short, growth this year is expected to compensate fully for last year's sharp contraction—as a result of the strong policy response, effective vaccines, and the resilience and adaptability of American households, workers, and businesses. While we are seeing progress on employment, joblessness remains high and continues to fall disproportionately on African Americans and Hispanics and lower-wage workers in the services sector. Last December, the Committee indicated that asset purchases would continue until substantial further progress toward our employment and inflation goals had been achieved. The June data showed that there is a shortfall of 6.8 million jobs relative to the pre-pandemic level and 9.1 million jobs relative to the pre-pandemic trend, respectively. The employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio is 3.2 percentage points short of its pre-pandemic level for prime-age workers, a group that is not affected by the elevated level of early retirements during the pandemic. Thus, as of June, we had closed between one-fourth and one-third of the employment shortfall relative to last December according to a variety of measures. Although the EPOP ratio for Black individuals has improved more strongly than the overall ratio over the course of 2021, closing about 40 percent of the December gap, it remains more than 3 percentage points below its pre-pandemic level and more than 2 percentage points below the current level of the EPOP ratio for white individuals. Currently, it is difficult to disentangle the effects on labor supply of caregiving responsibilities brought on by the pandemic, fears of contracting the virus, and the enhanced unemployment insurance that was designed in part to address such constraints. Importantly, I expect to be more confident in assessing the rate of progress once we have data in hand for September, when consumption, school, and work patterns should be settling into a post pandemic normal. I fully expect progress to continue, ultimately leading to a labor market as strong or stronger than we saw before the pandemic. Looking ahead, if jobs were to continue to increase at the second-quarter average monthly pace, about two-thirds of the outstanding job losses as of December 2020 and nearly half of the gap relative to the pre-pandemic trend would be made up by the end of 2021. If, instead, the rate of job growth were to accelerate notably, those levels could be reached somewhat sooner. Today's data showed that core PCE inflation rose 0.45 percent in June, once again driven by outsized contributions from a handful of categories. New and used vehicles contributed just under 40 percent of the June increase in core PCE, while price increases for travel-related items like hotels, airfares and rental cars contributed another 25 percent.2All told, price increases associated with vehicles and vacations, categories that comprise about 8 percent of the core PCE basket, were responsible for over 60 percent of the June core PCE price increase. Recent high inflation readings reflect supply–demand mismatches in a handful of sectors that are likely to prove transitory. In assessing inflation, an annualized 24-month measure that looks through the steep declines and subsequent rebound in prices in categories affected by the pandemic currently has core PCE inflation running at 2.3 percent and headline PCE inflation running at 2.4 percent. It is reasonable to expect these measures to remain near those levels for much of the rest of the year. By comparison, this 24-month measure was running at 1.6 percent in December 2020. I am attentive to the risk that inflation pressures could broaden or prove persistent, perhaps as a result of wage pressures, persistent increases in rent, or businesses passing on a larger fraction of cost increases rather than reducing markups, as in recent recoveries. I am particularly attentive to any signs that currently high inflation readings are pushing longer-term inflation expectations above our 2 percent objective. Currently, I do not see such signs. Most measures of survey- and market-based expectations suggest that the current high inflation pressures are transitory, and underlying trend inflation remains near its pre-COVID trend. Since the June FOMC meeting, five-year, five-year-forward inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities has declined a little less than 20 basis points, on net, and it currently stands at 2.2 percent, at the low end of its range of values prior to the 2014 decline. The second-quarter reading from the Federal Reserve Board's index of common inflation expectations stands at 2.05 percent, which is at the bottom of the range that prevailed from 2008 to 2014, when 12-month total PCE inflation averaged 1.7 percent.3 Many of the forces currently leading to outsized gains in prices are likely to dissipate by this time next year. Current tailwinds from fiscal support and pent-up consumption are likely to shift to headwinds, and some of the outsized price increases associated with acute supply bottlenecks may ease or partially reverse as those bottlenecks are resolved. Lumber prices have fallen, wholesale used car prices appear to have peaked, and auto semiconductor production is projected to expand. While there is good reason to expect that the inflation dynamics that prevailed for a quarter-century will reassert themselves on the other side of reopening, I will remain vigilant to any signs that inflationary pressures are likely to prove more persistent or that expectations are moving above target. If inflation moves persistently and materially above our target, we would adjust policy to guide inflation gently back to target. There are risks on both sides of the outlook. There are upside risks to consumption spending associated with the high level of households' savings. There are downside risks associated with the Delta variant. While the economy's momentum is strong, vaccination rates remain low in some areas, and fears related to the Delta variant may damp the rebound in services and complicate the return to in-person school and work in some areas and slow the rotation from goods to services that account for three- fourths of the shortfall in jobs In coming meetings, we will continue to assess progress and the conditions under which it will be appropriate to start paring back the pace of our asset purchases. Twenty-four-month core PCE inflation is now running at a 2.3 percent average annualized rate. In contrast, employment is still down by 6.8 million to 9.1 million relative to its pre-COVID level and trend, respectively, and it has closed about one-fourth to one-third of its December gap. The determination of when to begin to slow asset purchases will depend importantly on the accumulation of evidence that substantial further progress on employment has been achieved. As of today, employment has some distance to go. It is important to emphasize that the achievement of substantial progress that will determine when the Committee starts reducing the pace of asset purchases is distinct from the maximum employment and inflation outcomes that are in the forward guidance for the policy rate. Remaining attentive to changing conditions and steady in our step-by-step approach to implementing policy under our new framework should ensure that the economy's momentum is sufficient when tailwinds shift to headwinds to achieve and sustain maximum employment and inflation robustly anchored at 2 percent. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis for his assistance in preparing these remarks. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The notable gap between the June PCE reading and the CPI reading is due, in part, to the lower weighting of vehicles in the PCE measure.Return to text 3. For more information about the index of common inflation expectations (CIE), see Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020), "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2),https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2551. The CIE data are available through the second quarter on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/research-data-series-index-of-common-inflation-expectations-20210305.htm.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Venice International Conference on Climate Change, Venice, Italy IntroductionThank you for inviting me today. It is an honor to be here and, after more than a year of remote conversations, it is truly wonderful to see so many people in person. As Chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), I have the privilege of collaborating with the Italian G20 Presidency, the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, and with the FSB membership on the most pressing issues affecting financial stability.1Among those issues, one of increasing focus is understanding and monitoring climate-related financial risks. Given the global nature of climate change, this demands a coordinated international effort. The FSB published last Wednesday a Climate Roadmap that presents a comprehensive and coordinated plan to address climate-related financial risks. The FSB's roadmap dovetails with the ongoing work of the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group (SFWG) to develop a broader sustainable finance roadmap. Today, in my role as Chair of the FSB, I would like to focus on the two foundational components of the FSB roadmap: disclosures and data. Globally consistent, comparable, and reliable disclosures, as well as a broader set of high-quality, relevant data, together, can provide the basis to assess climate-related financial risks and the impact on financial stability. DisclosureThe FSB was an early leader in bringing attention to the importance of reliable, entity-level disclosures to assess and manage climate-related financial risks and opportunities. In 2015, the FSB submitted a proposal to the G20 to create an industry-led disclosure task force on climate-related risks.2The work of this FSB-sponsored Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, or TCFD, has led to greater recognition of the importance of climate-related financial risk and of comparable and reliable disclosure. The early development of industry-led recommendations and a usable framework by users and producers of this information was critical. The four core elements of the TCFD recommendations have provided a widely accepted framework for disclosures—covering governance, strategy, risk management, and metrics and targets. The task force has continued to provide significant support to those seeking to disclose and has encouraged steadily increasing uptake. These initial steps greatly helped to define appropriate parameters, drive towards consistency, and give the public sector a running start in developing their own approaches. Now it is time to build on that work. It will be useful to establish a globally consistent baseline standard for climate-related disclosures. Globally consistent and comparable entity-level disclosures by non-financial companies, banks, insurers, and asset managers are increasingly important to market participants and financial authorities as a means of providing information needed to assess and manage risks. The G20 Presidency, in developing its 2021 work program, asked the FSB to encourage more consistency in disclosure practices. As a start, the FSB surveyed what financial authorities across our membership were doing to promote disclosures. Almost all our members have already set requirements, guidance, or expectations or plan to do so. We found some heterogeneity in the approaches they were taking. Some members prefer mandated disclosure while others would make it voluntary. There is also variation in the desired scope of disclosures. However, there is a trend towards an important baseline that focuses on one-way materiality—or the financial risk that climate change could have on a particular entity—based on the TCFD recommendations. The majority of our membership are already using the TCFD recommendations as a baseline for their own requirements or guidance. The International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation (IFRS), in consultation with other international organizations, will develop a set of standards, starting initially with climate and building upon these TCFD recommendations. As reflected in our December 2020 statement, the FSB supports IFRS's advancement of an International Sustainability Standards Board to take this work quickly forward.3This work holds the promise of providing baseline standards that could inform or be built upon by national authorities as they develop their approaches to climate-related financial disclosure or broader sustainability disclosure. The initial focus of the IFRS will be on climate standards, while allowing for interoperability with individual jurisdictions' frameworks, that may go beyond climate-related impacts. Consistency in one-way disclosures would provide a needed avenue for accurate and appropriate risk assessment and comparability to assess investment decisions. Simultaneously, the IFRS standards are intended to provide flexibility for national authorities to build on the baseline. The "interoperability" feature will allow jurisdictions to address broader or jurisdiction-specific concerns in a manner consistent with their legal and regulatory frameworks, and indeed to go further in scope or faster if they wish. Given the importance of this work, we encourage the IFRS to press forward as quickly as possible. In the interim, the FSB continues to encourage jurisdictions that are implementing frameworks to base them on the TCFD recommendations to avoid unnecessary fragmentation. DataThe need for high quality, reliable data doesn't stop at firms' disclosures, however. International initiatives are needed to improve data quality and address data gaps, and ultimately to establish a basis of comprehensive, consistent, and comparable data for global monitoring and assessing climate-related financial risks. We published a separate report on this topic last week. Our data needs include data on the underlying drivers of physical and transition risk and financial institutions' exposures. The challenges here are considerable. To understand the financial risks, better information is needed on the underlying physical risks, including the sorts of extreme weather events that pose greatest risks to the balance sheets of households, firms, and financial institutions. Comparable data is also needed on the nature of jurisdictions' climate-change targets and progress in meeting them. All this information needs to be related to financial risks—including financial institutions' exposures to non-financial counterparties. This is not an easy task. The current lack of usable data is a reflection of difficulties in transforming existing information on the drivers of climate risk into reliable metrics that quantify financial risks. The key here is to find metrics that are forward-looking, recognizing that the nature and magnitude of future climate-related risks may differ from those in the past. Improved financial risk data can also help achieve the financial stability mandates of financial authorities. For example, the FSB is exploring how to assess the degree to which climate-related risks might be transferred or amplified by different financial sectors, including the interdependence of banks and insurance firms. Climate-related risks vary across jurisdictions, and we need to look at how risks might be amplified by feedback loops with the real economy. Such analysis will contribute to a more comprehensive and global understanding of how to assess climate change and potential effects on the financial system, but those efforts are hampered by a variety of data limitations. The FSB is working with international bodies, such as the International Monetary Fund, and other international groupings, such as the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), to assess climate data gaps and to identify steps to address them, with a special emphasis on ensuring cross-sectoral and international consistency. For example, the FSB plans to coordinate work with the NGFS on the issues surrounding scenario analyses, which some jurisdictions are using or contemplating, and the financial metrics that would be useful for such an analysis, both at the level of the firm and the overall system. Examining scenario analysis presents many challenges: A very long time horizon—which requires dynamic balance-sheet analysis—and the need to capture the interplay between the macro-economy and drivers of climate-related risks are two such challenges that would need to be overcome. ConclusionToday, the FSB is well-positioned to lead in the next phases of the work required to assess and address climate-related financial risk. The FSB's mandate, its diverse membership, and its connection to the G20 make it the ideal forum to forge a consensus on the appropriate path forward. The FSB, as laid out in its roadmap, has taken on a critical role in coordinating and carrying forward work that will make the global financial system more resilient to the threats posed by climate change. The roadmap establishes a strategic vision for addressing climate-related financial risks, which sets out how we will coordinate with other standard-setting bodies and international organizations in order to progress towards our goal. Our Climate Roadmap leverages the FSB's strength as a coordinating body, provides some structure to the vast amount of work on climate-related financial risks currently going on internationally, and clarifies interdependencies between workstreams and between issues. The Climate Roadmap sets the course and promotes consistency through, among other things, building consensus around common principles, best practices, and cross-jurisdictional alignment. These include the two broad objectives that I have focused on today—establishing consistent, comparable, and reliable information through a global baseline standard for disclosures and through improving the availability and quality of data. The roadmap also includes work on analytical tools and policy approaches developed for identifying and managing climate-related financial risks. We have a long road ahead of us, but every journey begins with the first steps. The FSB will continue to leverage its strengths to coordinate and contribute to understanding and addressing the challenges to the financial system that arise from these risks. 1. The views expressed in these remarks are those of the speaker in his role as FSB Chair and do not necessarily reflect those of the FSB or its members.Return to text 2. Seehttps://www.fsb.org/2015/11/disclosure-task-force-on-climate-related-risks-2/.Return to text 3. Seehttps://www.fsb.org/2020/12/the-implications-of-climate-change-for-financial-stability-2/.Return to text
The Federal Reserve announced on Thursday it will soon release a new tool to help community banks implement the Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL) accounting standard. Known as the Scaled CECL Allowance for Losses Estimator or "SCALE," the spreadsheet-based tool draws on publicly available regulatory and industry data to aid community banks with assets of less than $1 billion in calculating their CECL allowances. "The SCALE tool responds directly to one of the consistent concerns I've heard from across community banks—navigating the complexity of complying with CECL. I'm confident smaller banks will find this tool greatly simplifies that work and provides a practical solution to this important compliance challenge," said Governor Michelle W. Bowman. The Federal Reserve will launch the SCALE tool and answer questions during an "Ask the Fed" webinar on July 15, 2021. The session is intended for community banks and will feature participation from the Financial Accounting Standards Board and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. Registration information is available athttps://www.askthefed.org/. The SCALE tool will be available viaSupervisionOutreach.org/cecl. Introduced by FASB in 2016, the CECL methodology was effective for most public financial institutions beginning in 2020 and most community banks with assets under $1 billion will implement CECL in 2023. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by First Bank Corp. of Fort Smith, Arkansas, to acquire Central Bancshares of Poteau, Inc., and indirectly acquire The Central National Bank of Poteau, both of Poteau, Oklahoma. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that is seeking individuals with a diverse set of expert insurance perspectives in life, property and casualty, and reinsurance issues to serve on its Insurance Policy Advisory Committee, or IPAC. The committee was established by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. IPAC is comprised of 21 members who serve staggered three-year terms and have professional backgrounds, including insurance accounting, actuarial science, academia, insurance regulation, and policyholder advocacy. Each year, the Board selects seven individuals to serve a three-year term. The Board may select additional individuals to fill any term that is unexpired and vacated by an existing member. The Board plans to announce the appointment of members after the fall IPAC meeting in 2021. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions on how to apply for IPAC membership, can be found in theFederal Registernotice. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Solicitation of Statements of Interest for Membership on the Insurance Policy Advisory Committee (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: First Vision Bank, Tullahoma, TennesseeFlood insurance violations; civil money penaltyConsent Order, dated June 30, 2021 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Texico Bancshares Corporation, Texico, Illinois and Texico State Bank, Texico, IllinoisCease and Desist Order, dated July 15, 2021 Enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced it is committed to working together with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to jointly strengthen and modernize regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). "We are delighted to work together to develop a joint Notice of Proposed Rulemaking building on the Board's September 2020 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, which was intended to provide a framework for a joint rulemaking that ensures the CRA remains a strong and effective tool to address inequities in access to credit and meet the needs of low- and moderate-income communities and garners broad support," said Federal Reserve Governor Lael Brainard. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955
WASHINGTON -- The Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) are committed to working together to jointly strengthen and modernize regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The agencies have broad authority and responsibility for implementing the CRA. Joint agency action will best achieve a consistent, modernized framework across all banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities in which they do business, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from May 17 through June 16, 2021. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Note:On September 23, 2021, the June 16 and July 28, 2021, minutes were updated to add references to the associated Federal Register documents.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on June 15–16, 2021. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 15-16, 2021:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on July 15, 2021. Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member McHenry, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. We pursue these goals based solely on data and objective analysis, and we are committed to doing so in a clear and transparent manner. Today I will review the current economic situation before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookOver the first half of 2021, ongoing vaccinations have led to a reopening of the economy and strong economic growth, supported by accommodative monetary and fiscal policy. Real gross domestic product this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. Household spending is rising at an especially rapid pace, boosted by strong fiscal support, accommodative financial conditions, and the reopening of the economy. Housing demand remains very strong, and overall business investment is increasing at a solid pace. As described in theMonetary Policy Report,supply constraints have been restraining activity in some industries, most notably in the motor vehicle industry, where the worldwide shortage of semiconductors has sharply curtailed production so far this year. Conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, but there is still a long way to go. Labor demand appears to be very strong; job openings are at a record high, hiring is robust, and many workers are leaving their current jobs to search for better ones. Indeed, employers added 1.7 million workers from April through June. However, the unemployment rate remained elevated in June at 5.9 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Job gains should be strong in coming months as public health conditions continue to improve and as some of the other pandemic-related factors currently weighing them down diminish. As discussed in theMonetary Policy Report,the pandemic-induced declines in employment last year were largest for workers with lower wages and for African Americans and Hispanics. Despite substantial improvements for all racial and ethnic groups, the hardest-hit groups still have the most ground left to regain. Inflation has increased notably and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. Inflation is being temporarily boosted by base effects, as the sharp pandemic-related price declines from last spring drop out of the 12-month calculation. In addition, strong demand in sectors where production bottlenecks or other supply constraints have limited production has led to especially rapid price increases for some goods and services, which should partially reverse as the effects of the bottlenecks unwind. Prices for services that were hard hit by the pandemic have also jumped in recent months as demand for these services has surged with the reopening of the economy. To avoid sustained periods of unusually low or high inflation, the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) monetary policy framework seeks longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent, the Committee's longer-run inflation objective. Measures of longer-term inflation expectations have moved up from their pandemic lows and are in a range that is broadly consistent with the FOMC's longer-run inflation goal. Two boxes in the JulyMonetary Policy Reportdiscuss recent developments in inflation and inflation expectations. Sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system, and we continue to monitor vulnerabilities here. While asset valuations have generally risen with improving fundamentals as well as increased investor risk appetite, household balance sheets are, on average, quite strong, business leverage has been declining from high levels, and the institutions at the core of the financial system remain resilient. Monetary PolicyI will now turn to monetary policy. At our June meeting, the FOMC kept the federal funds rate near zero and maintained the pace of our asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. We continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. As the Committee reiterated in our June policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. As always, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, we will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer-term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal. In addition, we are continuing to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage‑backed securities at least at their current pace until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. These purchases have materially eased financial conditions and are providing substantial support to the economy. At our June meeting, the Committee discussed the economy's progress toward our goals since we adopted our asset purchase guidance last December. While reaching the standard of "substantial further progress" is still a ways off, participants expect that progress will continue. We will continue these discussions in coming meetings. As we have said, we will provide advance notice before announcing any decision to make changes to our purchases. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. The resumption of ourFed Listensinitiative will further strengthen our ongoing efforts to learn from a broad range of groups about how they are recovering from the economic hardships brought on by the pandemic. We at the Federal Reserve will do everything we can to support the recovery and foster progress toward our statutory goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions.