The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced final guidelines that establish a transparent, risk-based, and consistent set of factors for Reserve Banks to use in reviewing requests to access Federal Reserve accounts and payment services. The final guidelines are substantially similar to those proposed by the Board in its May 2021 proposal and March 2022 supplemental proposal. "The new guidelines provide a consistent and transparent process to evaluate requests for Federal Reserve accounts and access to payment services in order to support a safe, inclusive, and innovative payment system," said Vice Chair Lael Brainard. Institutions offering new types of financial products or with novel charters have grown in recent years and many have requested access to accounts – often referred to as "master accounts" – and payment services offered by Federal Reserve Banks. The guidelines will be used by Reserve Banks to evaluate those requests with a transparent and consistent set of factors. The new guidelines include a tiered review framework to provide additional clarity on the level of due diligence and scrutiny that Reserve Banks will apply to different types of institutions with varying degrees of risk. For example, institutions with federal deposit insurance would be subject to a more streamlined level of review, while institutions that engage in novel activities and for which authorities are still developing appropriate supervisory and regulatory frameworks would undergo a more extensive review. In response to public comments, the tiered review framework in the final guidelines was refined to provide more comparable treatment between non-federally-insured institutions chartered under state and federal law. The new guidelines will be effective upon publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please call 202-452-2955 or email[email protected]. Federal Register notice: Guidelines for Evaluating Account and Services Requests (PDF) Board Memo: Proposed Guidelines to Evaluate Requests for Accounts and Services at Federal Reserve Banks (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it has fined EagleBank, of Bethesda, Maryland, $9.5 million for violation of the Board's insider lending regulation. The bank improperly extended credit to entities owned or controlled by its then-CEO and Chairman, Ronald D. Paul. The Board found that EagleBank had deficient internal controls over insider lending practices between 2015 and 2018, which allowed the bank to extend credit totaling nearly $100 million to entities that Paul owned or controlled, including certain family trusts, without making appropriate disclosures to, or obtaining required approvals from, a majority of the bank's board of directors. These internal control deficiencies also extended to the bank's supervision of lending staff, who permitted Paul to participate in matters in which he had a conflict of interest. The Board also cited EagleBank for third-party risk management deficiencies over the same period that resulted in inadequate oversight of contracts between the bank and a local government official. In addition, the Board announced that it has permanently barred Paul from employment in the banking industry and assessed a $90,000 fine against him for his central role in the bank's violations of law and unsafe and unsound practices. In conjunction with these actions by the Board, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission today announced its own settlement of actions against Paul and EagleBank's holding company, Eagle Bancorp, Inc. In total, the bank and holding company will pay approximately $22.9 million and Paul will pay approximately $521,000 to settle the agency actions. The Boardpreviously barredEagleBank's former General Counsel Laurence E. Bensignor from banking for his role in EagleBank's unsafe and unsound lending practices. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it is seeking individuals with a diverse set of expert insurance perspectives in life, property and casualty, and reinsurance issues to serve on its Insurance Policy Advisory Committee (IPAC). The IPAC was established by the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. It is comprised of 21 members who serve staggered three-year terms and have diverse professional backgrounds, including insurance accounting, actuarial science, academia, insurance regulation, and policyholder advocacy. Each year, the Board selects seven individuals to each serve three-year terms. The Board may select additional individuals to fill any term that is unexpired and vacated by an existing member. The Board plans to announce the appointment of members later this year. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions on how to apply for IPAC membership, can be found in theFederal Registernotice. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Insurance Policy Advisory Committee
Following its stress test earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board today announced the individual capital requirements for all large banks, effective on October 1. Large bank capital requirements are in part determined by the Board's stress test results, which provide a risk-sensitive and forward-looking assessment of capital needs. The "Large Banks Capital Requirements" table shows each bank's total common equity tier 1 capital requirement, which is made up of several components, including: If a bank's capital dips below its total requirement announced today, the bank is subject to automatic restrictions on both capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. The Board also today affirmed the stress test results for two firms that requested reconsideration. Those firms are Bank of America Corporation and Huntington Bancshares Incorporated. The reconsideration process involved an independent group—separate from the stress testing group—that analyzed and evaluated the results. The results were checked for errors and to ensure that the stress test models, which project the loan losses and revenues for banks under the hypothetical stress scenario, worked as intended and were consistent with the principles described in the Board'sStress Testing Policy Statement. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955. Large Bank Capital Requirements (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday provided additional information for banking organizations engaging or seeking to engage in crypto-asset-related activities. The emerging crypto-asset sector presents potential opportunities to banking organizations, their customers, and the overall financial system; however, crypto-asset-related activities may also pose risks related to safety and soundness, consumer protection, and financial stability. The supervisory letter issued today outlines the steps Board-supervised banks should take prior to engaging in crypto-asset-related activities, such as assessing whether such activities are legally permissible and determining whether any regulatory filings are required. Additionally, the supervisory letter states that Board-supervised banking organizations should notify the Board prior to engaging in crypto-asset-related activities. The supervisory letter also emphasizes that Board-supervised banking organizations should have adequate systems and controls in place to conduct crypto-asset-related activities in a safe and sound manner prior to commencing such activities. The Board, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation previously released aninteragency statementregarding their crypto-asset policy initiative last year. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. SR 22-6 / CA 22-6: Engagement in Crypto-Asset-Related Activities by Federal Reserve-Supervised Banking Organizations
CHICAGO – The Federal Reserve Banks have narrowed the timing of the FedNow Service launch to mid-year 2023, specifically targeting a production rollout of the service in the May to July timeframe. This further defines the previously communicated 2023 launch window for the anticipated instant payments service and comes as the FedNow Pilot Program prepares to enter technical testing for the service starting in September. "Today, with the FedNow launch date in sight, we are pleased with the collaboration and dedication our pilot participants have brought to advance modern payments in America," said Esther George, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and executive sponsor of the FedNow program. Currently, more than 120 organizations are participating in the FedNow Pilot Program. Recent newcomers include U.S. Bank, Exchange Bank, and several payment processors and solution providers, including Alacriti Payments LLC, ECS Fin Inc., Form3 and ModusBox, Inc. The FedNow Service will be accessible to financial institutions of any size, helping broaden the reach of instant payments to communities nationwide. Financial institutions participating in the service will be able to provide businesses and consumers with the ability to send and receive instant payments efficiently and securely. Payment recipients will have full access to funds immediately, giving them greater flexibility to manage their money and make time-sensitive payments. "The benefits of instant payments are increasingly important to consumers and businesses, and the ability to provide this service will be critical for financial institutions to remain competitive," said Ken Montgomery, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston first vice president and FedNow Service program executive. "Next year, financial institutions will be able to use the FedNow Service as a springboard to provide innovative solutions to their customers." Participants in the FedNow Pilot Program will complete a certification process to ensure operational and messaging readiness and then move into production once the service is launched. As the pilot program moves into the testing phase, the Federal Reserve is beginning to engage non-pilot financial institutions and service providers interested in being early adopters of the service. About the FedNow ServiceThe Federal Reserve Banks are developing the FedNow Service to facilitate nationwide reach of instant payment services by financial institutions – regardless of size or geographic location – around the clock, every day of the year. Through financial institutions participating in the FedNow Service, businesses and individuals will be able to send and receive instant payments at any time of day, and recipients will have full access to funds immediately, giving them greater flexibility to manage their money and make time-sensitive payments. Access will be provided through the Federal Reserve's FedLine®network, which serves more than 10,000 financial institutions directly or through their agents. For more information, visitFedNowExplorer.org.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2022 CEO & Senior Management Summit sponsored by the Kansas Bankers Association, Colorado Springs, Colorado Thanks to the Kansas Bankers Association for the invitation to share my perspective on the economy and bank regulation. It is always a pleasure to be here with you for this annual gathering. I am especially looking forward to hearing what is on your minds about supervision and regulation, how you are navigating current economic conditions, and your expectations going forward. I'll start with a recap of the decision from July's Federal Open Market Committee meeting and then move on to my thoughts about the current economic uncertainty and challenges that lie ahead. The number one challenge, of course, is inflation, which continues to be much too high, and a heavy burden for households and businesses. As I'm sure you all already know, the Federal Open Market Committee decided last week to raise the federal funds rate by 75 basis points, to a range of 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. I will share my reasoning for supporting this increase and why I support continued increases until inflation is on a consistent path to significantly decline. I will then touch on the current federal regulatory climate and the Fed's agenda for supervision. Inflation continued to climb in June, reaching 9.1 percent as measured by the consumer price index. This is yet another concerningly high reading, and it set another 40-year record high despite the expectation of many forecasters that inflation had peaked earlier in the year. I have seen few, if any, concrete indications that support this expectation, and I will need to see unambiguous evidence of this decline before I incorporate an easing of inflation pressures into my outlook. Many of the underlying causes of excessive inflation are the same as they have been over the past year or so—supply chain issues, including those related to China's COVID containment policies, constrained housing supply, the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, fiscal stimulus, and limitations on domestic energy production. Regardless of the source of the inflationary pressure, the Federal Reserve has a duty to bring inflation down to our 2 percent target. This duty is mandated by Congress to carry out monetary policy that results in price stability—meaning low and stable inflation. We all understand why this is a critically important responsibility, especially in times of extreme inflation. Rising prices for food, housing, and energy negatively impact affordability for all Americans, but especially those with low or moderate incomes. For those workers who drive long distances to get to work, high inflation is especially concerning, requiring some to make tradeoffs between feeding their families and buying fuel to fill gas tanks.Some workers have seen their wages grow significantly over the past two years, but most have seen any gains in wages far outpaced by higher prices. Therefore, in my mind, it is absolutely critical that we continue to use our monetary policy tools until we are successful in returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Businesses are also suffering from elevated inflation through rising and volatile prices for inputs and the need to price their own goods and services to cover costs without losing customers. This dynamic is evident in agriculture and what we are hearing directly from farmers and ranchers, who are dealing with added weather challenges and on-going drought. Prices for commodities have declined lately but are still at historically high levels. In contrast, prices for fertilizer and many crop inputs continue to rise. In some areas, high input costs and drought conditions are contributing to record early season cattle auction sales, as many ranchers choose to sell herds early to limit further outlays for input expenses. I see a significant risk of high inflation into next year for necessities including food, housing, fuel, and vehicles. Rents have grown dramatically, and while home sales have slowed, the continued increasing price of single-family homes indicates to me that rents won't decline anytime in the near future. Recently, gasoline prices have moderated but are still roughly 80 percent higher than pre-pandemic levels due to constrained domestic supply and the disruption of world markets. And I see continued inflation risk from motor vehicle prices, as auto manufacturers struggle with supply chain problems that haven't improved significantly. Demand for cars continues to exceed supply, and retail used car prices are still very high, about 50 percent more than before the pandemic. The supply problems pushing up inflation seem likely to persist. Indications are that the conflict in Ukraine will continue, and that the effects of shipping disruptions of agriculture products and limits on energy supplies from Russia will continue to be a significant problem. Even with the recent agreement intended to facilitate Ukrainian grain exports, it is unclear whether supply pressures on global markets will ease as a result. An announced reduction in Russian natural gas supplies to Western Europe has driven European prices even higher, causing ripple effects on world energy markets and raising concerns about shortages this winter. China has eased some of its most stringent COVID containment measures but recently revived travel restrictions in some areas, and its approach to the pandemic remains an upside risk for inflation. Despite a slowdown in sales of new and existing homes, inventories of homes for sale and rental vacancies remain low, supporting ongoing increases in housing costs. On the other side of our dual mandate, maximum employment, we continue to see a tight labor market, though there are some emerging signs that would support expectations of loosening. Yesterday's job report showed continued significant growth in hiring with the unemployment rate finally returning to the pre-pandemic level of 3.5 percent. As I am sure you all know, the job market in Kansas is even stronger, with an unemployment rate of 2.4 percent in June. In our state, finding workers is a bigger problem in most communities than finding a job. One aspect of the job market that has not recovered is labor force participation. Based on the pre-pandemic trend, there are nearly four million people who are still sitting out of a strong labor market. In contrast to this labor market strength in Kansas and nationwide, output growth has slowed this year. Real gross domestic product, GDP, edged lower in the second quarter, following a larger decline in the first quarter. My base case is for a pickup in growth during the second half of this year and for moderate growth in 2023. As we learned during the summer and fall of 2021, both GDP and jobs numbers are subject to significant revision, both in subsequent months and then again the next year. From my perspective, had we known at the time about the eventual large upward revisions in last year's employment data, we likely would have significantly accelerated our monetary policy actions. Going forward, we have to consider the possibility of these kinds of revisions when making real-time judgments as policymakers, which includes looking at other kinds of indicators instead of relying too heavily on the data. Taking all of that on board, while the data on economic activity are indeed lower and the view is murky, the evidence on inflation is absolutely clear, which brings me to the implications for monetary policy. Based on current economic conditions and the outlook I just described, I supported the FOMC's decision last week to raise the federal funds rate another 75 basis points. I also support the Committee's view that "ongoing increases" would be appropriate at coming meetings. My view is that similarly-sized increases should be on the table until we see inflation declining in a consistent, meaningful, and lasting way. On the subject of forward guidance, I am pleased to see that following the July meeting, the FOMC ended the practice of providing specific forward guidance in our post-meeting communications. I believe that the overly specific forward guidance implemented at the December 2020 FOMC meeting requiring "substantial further progress" unnecessarily limited the Committee's actions in beginning the removal of accommodation later in 2021. In my view, that, combined with data revisions that were directly relevant to our decision making, led to a delay in taking action to address rising inflation. It is helpful that the FOMC provided clear direction earlier this year that it was prepared to act quickly to tighten monetary policy. Since we have now taken actions to raise rates and finally reduce the Fed's balance sheet, we are following through on that commitment. Looking ahead, the FOMC will be getting two months of data on inflation and another month on employment before our next meeting in September, and while I expect that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate, given the uncertainty in how those data and conditions will evolve, I will allow that information to guide my judgment on how big the increases will need to be. I do expect that the labor market will remain strong as we continue to increase interest rates and allow the balance sheet to run off, but there is a risk that our actions will slow job gains, or even reduce employment. Growth has softened, and perhaps this is an indication that our actions to tighten monetary policy are having the desired effect, with the ultimate goal of bringing demand and supply into greater balance. When considering the risks to the labor market, these risks must be viewed in the context of its current strength and with the understanding that our primary challenge is to get inflation under control. In fact, the larger threat to the strong labor market is excessive inflation, which if allowed to continue could lead to a further economic softening, risking a prolonged period of economic weakness coupled with high inflation, like we experienced in the 1970s. In any case, we must fulfill our commitment to lowering inflation, and I will remain steadfastly focused on this task. With my outlook out of the way, let me turn to another of my responsibilities at the Fed, which is bank regulation and supervision. I am sure that we will have the opportunity to discuss many issues of interest to you during our discussion, but I'd like to mention a pending rulemaking that would update the Community Reinvestment Act. I understand that the draft rule was intended to provide greater clarity to banks regarding community development activities and their consideration for CRA. While I am a strong supporter of the fundamentals behind CRA, and I support community development activities, I am concerned that the proposal does not adequately account for the costs and benefits of certain provisions, and that no attempt has even been made to either ensure that or to analyze whether the benefits exceed the costs, which is a fundamental element of effective regulation. The comment period for the proposal ended on August 5, and I will repeat what I have said in the past: if this proposal affects you or your business, I hope that you made your voice heard by submitting a comment to the more than 600-page proposal within the short 90-day comment period. Public comments really do matter when considering the content of proposed rulemakings. Of course, my comments about the benefits of public participation in rulemaking apply beyond the CRA proposal, and there are other regulatory topics on the horizon that would benefit from robust engagement. One that comes to mind is the regulatory framework for analyzing bank mergers. Earlier this year, the Justice Department requested comment on whether to revise their 1995 Bank Merger Competitive Review guidelines, seeking input on a wide range of issues. The FDIC also issued a request for information on the Bank Merger Act framework. I expect this review will be a focus across the banking agencies, and I will be very interested to see how the framework for small and regional banks is affected by any proposed change. I would be concerned about any changes that would result in making mergers among these institutions more difficult or would not address some of the longstanding issues with the existing framework. Among those are that the framework doesn't account for new technologies or overwhelming competition posed by credit unions, internet based financial services, and non-bank financial companies. Another concern is that overly strict criteria for mergers could have the unintended consequence of depriving consumers in some areas of access to any banking services. "Banking deserts" in rural and underserved areas are a real problem and regulators should guard against this outcome when proposing or evaluating rules. I should also briefly mention three other regulatory topics of interest to all banks, including those here today. First, the Fed's LIBOR proposal is currently out for comment on a short timeline. That proposal implements the recently passed LIBOR Act by providing default rules for certain contracts that use the soon to be discontinued reference rate. Second, comments are currently under review for the third-party risk management guidance jointly proposed by the Fed with the other banking agencies. Banks and third parties will benefit from clear guidance that helps banks navigate the challenging issues and risks raised by third party engagement. Finally, another area that could benefit from more regulatory clarity is digital assets, including stablecoins and crypto assets. Some banks are considering expanding into a range of crypto activities, including custody, lending backed by crypto collateral, and facilitating the purchase and sale of these assets for their customers. In the absence of clear guidance, banks should consult with their primary regulator and exercise caution when engaging with customers in these types of activities. I will conclude with a brief comment on supervision. While the trend of returning to on-site bank examination is continuing, progress has been somewhat slow. This may be driven in part by the varied pace of employees returning to the office. That said, the Fed intends to return to some form of on-site supervision. We find substantial value in those in-person interactions during bank examinations. In closing, thank you again for the opportunity to speak to you today. I look forward to hearing how high inflation is affecting you and your communities and your thoughts on the regulatory agenda.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings on July 18 and July 27, 2022. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 26–27, 2022. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 26-27, 2022:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell At “Reassessing Constraints on the Economy and Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. At past Jackson Hole conferences, I have discussed broad topics such as the ever-changing structure of the economy and the challenges of conducting monetary policy under high uncertainty. Today, my remarks will be shorter, my focus narrower, and my message more direct. The Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) overarching focus right now is to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. The burdens of high inflation fall heaviest on those who are least able to bear them. Restoring price stability will take some time and requires using our tools forcefully to bring demand and supply into better balance. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth. Moreover, there will very likely be some softening of labor market conditions. While higher interest rates, slower growth, and softer labor market conditions will bring down inflation, they will also bring some pain to households and businesses. These are the unfortunate costs of reducing inflation. But a failure to restore price stability would mean far greater pain. The U.S. economy is clearly slowing from the historically high growth rates of 2021, which reflected the reopening of the economy following the pandemic recession. While the latest economic data have been mixed, in my view our economy continues to show strong underlying momentum. The labor market is particularly strong, but it is clearly out of balance, with demand for workers substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. Inflation is running well above 2 percent, and high inflation has continued to spread through the economy. While the lower inflation readings for July are welcome, a single month's improvement falls far short of what the Committee will need to see before we are confident that inflation is moving down. We are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. At our most recent meeting in July, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate to 2.25 to 2.5 percent, which is in the Summary of Economic Projection's (SEP) range of estimates of where the federal funds rate is projected to settle in the longer run. In current circumstances, with inflation running far above 2 percent and the labor market extremely tight, estimates of longer-run neutral are not a place to stop or pause. July's increase in the target range was the second 75 basis point increase in as many meetings, and I said then that another unusually large increase could be appropriate at our next meeting. We are now about halfway through the intermeeting period. Our decision at the September meeting will depend on the totality of the incoming data and the evolving outlook. At some point, as the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it likely will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. Committee participants' most recent individual projections from the June SEP showed the median federal funds rate running slightly below 4 percent through the end of 2023. Participants will update their projections at the September meeting. Our monetary policy deliberations and decisions build on what we have learned about inflation dynamics both from the high and volatile inflation of the 1970s and 1980s, and from the low and stable inflation of the past quarter-century. In particular, we are drawing on three important lessons. The first lesson is that central bankscanandshouldtake responsibility for delivering low and stable inflation. It may seem strange now that central bankers and others once needed convincing on these two fronts, but as former Chairman Ben Bernanke has shown, both propositions were widely questioned during the Great Inflation period.1Today, we regard these questions as settled. Our responsibility to deliver price stability is unconditional. It is true that the current high inflation is a global phenomenon, and that many economies around the world face inflation as high or higher than seen here in the United States. It is also true, in my view, that the current high inflation in the United States is the product of strong demand and constrained supply, and that the Fed's tools work principally on aggregate demand. None of this diminishes the Federal Reserve's responsibility to carry out our assigned task of achieving price stability. There is clearly a job to do in moderating demand to better align with supply. We are committed to doing that job. The second lesson is that the public's expectations about future inflation can play an important role in setting the path of inflation over time. Today, by many measures, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored. That is broadly true of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, and of market-based measures as well. But that is not grounds for complacency, with inflation having run well above our goal for some time. If the public expects that inflation will remain low and stable over time, then, absent major shocks, it likely will. Unfortunately, the same is true of expectations of high and volatile inflation. During the 1970s, as inflation climbed, the anticipation of high inflation became entrenched in the economic decisionmaking of households and businesses. The more inflation rose, the more people came to expect it to remain high, and they built that belief into wage and pricing decisions. As former Chairman Paul Volcker put it at the height of the Great Inflation in 1979, "Inflation feeds in part on itself, so part of the job of returning to a more stable and more productive economy must be to break the grip of inflationary expectations."2 One useful insight into how actual inflation may affect expectations about its future path is based in the concept of "rational inattention."3When inflation is persistently high, households and businesses must pay close attention and incorporate inflation into their economic decisions. When inflation is low and stable, they are freer to focus their attention elsewhere. Former Chairman Alan Greenspan put it this way: "For all practical purposes, price stability means that expected changes in the average price level are small enough and gradual enough that they do not materially enter business and household financial decisions."4 Of course, inflation has just about everyone's attention right now, which highlights a particular risk today: The longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. That brings me to the third lesson, which is that we must keep at it until the job is done. History shows that the employment costs of bringing down inflation are likely to increase with delay, as high inflation becomes more entrenched in wage and price setting. The successful Volcker disinflation in the early 1980s followed multiple failed attempts to lower inflation over the previous 15 years. A lengthy period of very restrictive monetary policy was ultimately needed to stem the high inflation and start the process of getting inflation down to the low and stable levels that were the norm until the spring of last year. Our aim is to avoid that outcome by acting with resolve now. These lessons are guiding us as we use our tools to bring inflation down. We are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply, and to keep inflation expectations anchored. We will keep at it until we are confident the job is done. 1. See Ben Bernanke (2004), "The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, February 20; Ben Bernanke (2022), "Inflation Isn't Going to Bring Back the 1970s,"New York Times,June 14.Return to text 2. See Paul A. Volcker (1979), "Statement before the Joint Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress, October 17, 1979,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 65 (November), p. 888.Return to text 3. A review of the applications of rational inattention in monetary economics appears in Christopher A. Sims (2010), "Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3 (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 155–81.Return to text 4. See Alan Greenspan (1989), "Statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 21, 1989,"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 75 (April), pp. 274–75.Return to text
Vice Chair Lael Brainard At FedNow Early Adopter Workshop, Rosemont, Illinois (via webcast) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. I am pleased to join the FedNow Early Adopter Workshop.1With the technical testing phase of the FedNow℠ Service kicking off in mid-September, I want to particularly thank the early adopters for the important investments they are making to prepare for the day when the FedNow Service goes live next year. Together with our partners, we will be ready to launch the FedNow Service between May and July of 2023, bringing this innovative core instant payment infrastructure to financial institutions of every size across America. We have been working hard to deliver on time, but ultimately the number of American businesses and households that are able to access instant payments will depend on financial services providers making the necessary investments to upgrade our payments infrastructure. Together, we can ensure that all Americans have access to a modern and reliable instant payment system. The payment system is a critical part of America's infrastructure that touches everyone. Americans rely on the payment system all day every day to make purchases, pay bills, and get paid—without ever needing to consider the complex infrastructure that is operating under the hood. American households and businesses want and deserve payment transactions that work seamlessly, reliably, and efficiently. Fostering a safe, efficient, and widely accessible payments infrastructure has been a central part of the Fed's mission since the very beginning. The Federal Reserve Banks all around the country have provided payment and settlement services alongside the private sector for more than 100 years. Over that period, we have repeatedly innovated and invested in collaboration with the private sector to transform the payment system, using the latest technology to better meet the needs of businesses and households.2Now, after extensive industry engagement and planning, the Federal Reserve is on track to deliver the FedNow Service by May to July of 2023. The FedNow Service will transform the way everyday payments are made throughout the economy, bringing substantial gains to households and businesses through the ability to send instant payments at any time on any day, and the funds being immediately available to recipients to make other payments or manage cash flow efficiently. Immediate availability of funds could be especially important for households managing their finances paycheck to paycheck or small businesses with cash flow constraints. Having the capacity to manage money in real time could help households avoid costly late payment fees or free up working capital for small businesses to finance growth. Indeed, during the pandemic, we witnessed how essential rapid access to funds can be, as many households started spending emergency relief payments on the day they were received.3 To deliver on the promise of a payment system for the future, the Federal Reserve has made a substantial commitment to the FedNow platform, which has benefited from the innovative technologies and approaches proven by global technology companies that are vital for today's always on digital economy. Our cloud-first design, unique among central bank instant payment services, positions us for the future by enabling not only the throughput and scalability required for high-volume retail transactions but also broad geographic points of resiliency to ensure continuous service. Cloud-first design affords other key technology components such as self-healing processes and automation, which add to operational resiliency. And our development processes are agile, allowing us to deliver new features faster to financial institutions of all sizes as they are ready to adopt them based on their priorities. We have also invested heavily in stakeholder engagement to ensure readiness for service adoption through efforts like the pilot program, the FedNow Explorer resource, the FedNow Community, the service provider showcase, and the FedNow Early Adopter Workshop.4To advance the goal of nationwide reach for instant payments, we have worked closely with the private-sector RTP instant payment service on message specifications to ensure alignment in support of routing interoperability. Just as the Federal Reserve has made a substantial commitment to our new instant payment infrastructure, we are calling on industry stakeholders to do the same. The shift to real-time payment infrastructure requires a focused effort, but the shift is inevitable. The time is now for all key stakeholders—financial institutions, core service providers, software companies, and application developers—to devote the resources necessary to support instant payments. This means upgrading back-office processes, evaluating accounting procedures to accommodate a seven-business-day week, arranging liquidity providers, deploying a new customer-facing application, and promoting instant payments for key use cases to customers. As the service providers featured at this event will demonstrate in the coming days, parts of the industry have already seized on the opportunity to build new services and capabilities that support instant payments. These efforts will increase competition in the market for end-user services and promote innovation—key benefits from providing the FedNow Service as a neutral platform, accessible to financial institutions of all sizes nationwide. I would like to personally thank our early adopters. The input that you have provided has been instrumental for our team as they have designed and built the service, and the time and energy that you have committed to this effort is important for a successful launch. I want to call on additional banks and core service providers to join your commitment to prepare for adoption of the FedNow Service. This time next year, I hope we can all have a great sense of accomplishment in our shared effort to transform America's payment system for the digital era. 1. I am grateful to Kirstin Wells of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Lael Brainard, "Supporting Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018); Esther George, "From Then to FedNow: Payments Innovation and the Federal Reserve (PDF)," Policy Perspectives (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December 18, 2020).Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, "The Future of Retail Payments in the United States" (remarks at the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C., via webcast, August 6, 2020).Return to text 4. Information about FedNow Service stakeholder outreach and other resources can be found at this link:https://www.frbservices.org/financial-services/fednow.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the VenCent Fintech Conference, Little Rock, Arkansas Thank you, Commissioner Marshall, for the invitation to speak to you today. It's really a pleasure to be here, finally in person at the Venture Center.1Much has happened over the past few years, and I have been following your work closely. Technology Is Changing Financial ServicesTechnology and innovation are a priority interest for my work at the Board of Governors. Technology can offer increased speed, lower costs, and greater efficiency in providing services and products in the financial industry. This week's conference agenda includes many of the topics I follow closely through our work on innovation. Much of the innovation in financial services is occurring in the nonbank sector, but technology is also changing the business of banking in profound ways. More and more customers interact with their banks exclusively through digital channels. They check their balances, apply for credit cards, and make deposits and payments via their phones, rather than visiting bank branches. But the changes run deeper than that. Technology is also changing fundamental aspects of bank operations. For example, banks are beginning to use artificial intelligence (AI) in credit underwriting, back-office operations, various aspects of risk management, and customer service. Technology is also leading to new bank business models. Many banks are using application programming interfaces and other technology to allow nonbank technology firms to provide financial services. Under many of these arrangements, the technology firm maintains the customer relationship, while the bank provides the underlying financial infrastructure, including deposit services and access to the payment rails. Federal Reserve Support for InnovationThe Federal Reserve is monitoring these transformations closely, and we are encouraged by the potential for improvements that can be brought by responsible innovation. I think it is critically important for banking regulators to support innovation in banking. Traditionally, banking regulators may have viewed banking innovation solely as a risk on a long list of risks that need to be appropriately managed. While that perspective won't change, I recognize that evolving consumer preferences are requiring banks to meet these technology-enabled expectations. It is true that new services and products present new risks, but these are not unmanageable risks. And, frankly, there is greater risk in standing still—in not recognizing the need to move forward. Failure to innovate can undermine a bank's competitiveness, posing a threat to safety and soundness just as innovating recklessly can. The Fed supports responsible innovation in a variety of ways, and I will mention a few of them in this discussion. For the past few years, I have been working to assist banks to address the challenges brought by the process of partnering with a third-party service provider. Last year, the Fed, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, proposed interagency guidance to assist in the management of risks involved in third-party engagement. The agencies received over 80 comment letters and are reviewing those comments as we move toward finalizing the guidance. In my view, it is especially helpful to provide clarity for banks in these kinds of relationships and to help them establish a solid foundation as banks and fintechs continue to engage in partnerships. Last year at this time, the federal banking agencies released a guide designed to assist community banks to assess risks in constructing and considering relationships with fintech companies. And lastly, this past September, the Federal Reserve published a paper detailing industry perspectives and experiences on the different types of partnerships between community banks and fintech companies.2We conducted extensive outreach with community banks, fintechs, and other stakeholders and incorporated real world experiences of the strategic and tactical decisions that led to effective partnerships. For the remainder of my remarks, I will focus on several issues that are likely top of mind for those who are engaged in financial services innovation. Crypto-AssetsLet's start with digital and crypto-assets. I am hearing more discussions involving banks' interest in offering services involving crypto-assets. The chatter seems to originate more from those outside the banking industry, but I'll put that aside for now. There seem to be a number of reasons for this interest and why customers might seek to engage in this type of activity. First, although the interest seemed to have cooled lately, given recent developments in the crypto industry, we have seen significant consumer demand for engagement in these types of services. It seems reasonable that because bank customers are aware of crypto and have discussed these assets with their banks, banks want to better understand this type of engagement and potentially provide those services to their customers. Second, we have also been told that banks have observed their deposits flowing to nonbank crypto-asset firms and, understandably, would like to stem that outflow by offering the services themselves. I certainly recognize and appreciate these challenges. But before a bank begins to engage in or offer crypto-asset-related services, it must seriously and carefully consider the risks involved—both to the bank and its customers. The recent turmoil in the digital-asset industry only underscores that point. Federal Reserve staff is working to articulate supervisory expectations for banks on a variety of digital asset-related activities, including We understand that everyone involved in this space is seeking clarity. One of the most important tools that we have as a regulator is the ability to clearly articulate our supervisory expectations. It is also our most direct path to encouraging and supporting responsible innovation. Earlier this week, we released supervisory guidance addressing banks that are engaging in or seeking to engage in crypto-asset related activities.3This guidance will provide banks with additional information about the risks of crypto activities and remind them to ensure that the activities are legal, and they should have adequate systems, risk management, and controls in place to conduct the activities in a safe and sound manner consistent with applicable law. Critically, one important element of this release is that firms should contact their supervisors about these types of activities and expect that supervisory staff will provide timely feedback, as appropriate. Based on my conversations with bankers across the country, I believe that providing the rules of the road—highlighting the risks we are most concerned about and laying out our expectations for how those risks should be managed—is invaluable for banks considering whether and how to innovate. Artificial IntelligenceThe Federal Reserve is taking a similar approach with respect to banks' use of AI. Last year, the Fed joined with four other financial agencies to issue a Request for Information and Comment on Financial Institutions' Use of Artificial Intelligence, Including Machine Learning.4As noted in that document, banks are using AI in a variety of ways, including fraud monitoring, personalization of customer services, credit decisions, risk management, and textual analysis. These applications of AI can, to varying degrees, involve risk-management challenges around issues such as explainability, data governance, cybersecurity, third-party risk management, and consumer compliance. The banking agencies received over 100 responses to the Request for Information. Those responses give us a window into what questions banks need regulators to answer about using AI. Federal Reserve staff is working with the other regulators to provide further clarity in this area. Payments: FedNow and Central Bank Digital CurrenciesPayments is another area where innovation continues to flourish, and the Federal Reserve is actively engaged in shaping the future payments landscape. The FedNowSMService will enable financial institutions of every size, and in every community across America, to provide safe and efficient instant payment services. It is intended to be a flexible, neutral platform that will support a broad variety of instant payments. It will allow depository institutions and their service providers to offer value-added services to their customers, ultimately enhancing competition in the market for payment services. Completing and implementing FedNow is a high priority, and we expect it to be available by mid-2023. FedNow will help transform the way payments are made through new services that allow consumers and businesses to make payments conveniently, in real time, on any day, and with immediate availability of funds for receivers. Our assessment of these benefits has not changed even as we consider whether a central bank digital currency (CBDC) might fit into the future U.S. money and payments landscape. My expectation is that FedNow addresses the issues that some have raised about the need for a CBDC. As I'm sure you are already aware, earlier this year we published a discussion paper that outlined some design principles, costs, and benefits of a CBDC and solicited public comments.5We received over 2,000 comments, and we are currently reviewing these comments and plan to publish a summary of them. Novel Charters and Access to Federal Reserve Account ServicesBefore I wrap up, let me touch on one more topic that relates to innovation in bank charter types. In recent years, there has been an increase in novel charter types being authorized or considered across the country at the state and national levels. As a result, Federal Reserve Banks are receiving an increased number of inquiries and requests for access to Reserve Bank master accounts and financial services, which could provide those institutions with access to the nation's payment system. On August 15, the Board of Governors published final guidelines that govern how Reserve Banks will evaluate requests for account access. The guidelines take into account the Board's goals to (1) ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system; (2) effectively implement monetary policy; (3) promote financial stability; (4) protect consumers; and (5) promote a safe, efficient, inclusive, and innovative payment system.6 The approach articulated in the guidelines is based on a foundation of risk management and mitigation, recognizing that access to Fed accounts and services can create significant risks. The systematic evaluation of these different risks is intended to establish a framework ensuring similar treatment for legally eligible institutions with similar risk profiles across the Reserve Banks. For example, requests for accounts and services from non-federally insured institutions would generally be subject to a higher standard of review. The Board expects Reserve Banks to collaborate on reviews of account and service requests, and conduct ongoing monitoring of approved accountholders, to ensure that the guidelines are implemented in a consistent manner. Publishing the guidelines is an important step to providing transparency and consistency across the Federal Reserve System. However, more work remains to be completed before a process is established to fully implement the guidelines. In the meantime, there is a risk that the guidelines could establish false expectations regarding the timeline for evaluating and acting on these requests. In closing, I'd like to once again thank the Venture Center for hosting this event and for providing the opportunity to get together to discuss innovation in financial services. It's great to finally be back in Little Rock and to have the chance to meet so many of you in person after such a long time. Commissioner Marshall, I look forward to our discussion. 1. These remarks reflect my views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful for the assistance of Federal Reserve Board staff Jeff Ernst, Kavita Jain, Molly Mahar, Jason Hinkle, and Kirstin Wells in preparing these remarks.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Federal Reserve Publishes Paper Describing Landscape of Partnerships Between Community Banks and Fintech Companies, news release, September 9, 2021.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Federal Reserve Board Provides Additional Information for Banking Organizations Engaging or Seeking to Engage in Crypto-Asset-Related Activities, news release, August 16, 2022.Return to text 4. 86 Fed. Reg. 16,837.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation (PDF), January 2022.Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Federal Reserve Board Announces Final Guidelines That Establish a Transparent, Risk-Based, and Consistent Set of Factors for Reserve Banks to Use in Reviewing Requests to Access Federal Reserve Accounts and Payment Services, news release, August 15, 2022.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Arkansas Women's Commission Meeting, Russellville, Arkansas It's a pleasure to be with you today to talk about a subject that I experience directly—women's labor force participation.1I come to this issue with a similar perspective to this Commission, being from a heavily rural state and a small farming and ranching community deep in the Flint Hills of Kansas. But I also have roots here in Arkansas, my husband's family is from Hardy, and my father's mother was from Little Rock. It's really nice to be back in an area where I spent a lot of time growing up. My husband and I returned home to Kansas with our two children under three in late 2009, just as the impacts of the last financial crisis were making their way to rural areas. At the time, I was a community banker, which means I was also a very active member of the community. As I am sure many of you did then, I saw firsthand the economic impacts of the recession and the increased drug and opioid use that devastated many rural communities across the Midwest. At that time, many in the community received benefits from well-intended programs created to provide assistance, which often made it very difficult for small employers to find employees. This was often because, as I learned when trying to hire employees at our local chamber of commerce, the benefit from taking a job was much less than the benefit one could receive from the government at that time while not working. This is one major similarity between the current experience and the last recession, except that in this episode, the benefits many received were far in excess of what they could earn from working. So much so that the benefits provided to a large number of Americans resulted in a significant increase in savings, which is only recently beginning to decline and likely leading many who had not yet decided to re-enter the workforce to find work. These labor supply problems, as I will explain, are a large part of women's experience in the workforce since the pandemic, and the lesson from this and other recessions is that policymakers need to carefully weigh all of the consequences of their decisions. It is fair to say that the majority of the economic conditions we are experiencing today, like inflation, are different from those of the last financial crisis. But as I just noted, there are some similarities in the impacts on the labor force. Turning to the subject of my remarks today, I will discuss the role of women in the U.S. economy, focusing on the period since the onset of COVID-19.2You may already know that women suffered disproportionately more job losses than men during the pandemic. This was the opposite of what happened in past recessions, when men lost jobs at a higher rate than women. The difference this time has led some to call the 2020 downturn a "she-cession." Most of the differences between how men and women fared in the labor market during that time had reversed by 2021, but their different experiences highlight how participation by men and women can sometimes be driven by different forces. The backdrop for recent events is the long history, starting after World War II, of women gradually entering the labor market. Of course, women have always significantly contributed to and played a large role in the U.S. economy, but initially in ways that don't show up in most government statistics. The rise of industrialization and the shift away from an agrarian economy provided opportunities for men to work outside the home and women took on more responsibility for cooking, sewing, child-rearing and other domestic tasks.3We heard an echo of that history during the pandemic, because when schools closed and other childcare was disrupted, women assumed the majority of those caregiving responsibilities, which led many to quit their jobs and drop out of the labor force. This magnified the effect by eliminating jobs in childcare resulting in even more unemployment. But that wasn't the only reason why women were impacted during this episode. Let me start with the big picture on the differences between men and women in the labor market. Before 1950, few women worked outside the home and the majority of those who did were unmarried. From 1950 to 1970, more women entered the workforce, but many did not plan to work for the long term, and their investment in education and training was often limited.4By the mid-1970s, barriers that limited opportunities for women in many workplaces began to fall, and by 1990 the education gap between men and women narrowed significantly. Women's participation steadily increased from there until the gains leveled off in the 1990s, but then rose again from 2015 to 2020, just before the pandemic. The narrowing of educational attainment for men and women had a lot to do with the narrowing of participation rates over the decades, and today women are more likely than men to hold a bachelor's degree. Even so, before the pandemic, overall participation remained lower for women than men regardless of education level. The response to the COVID-19 pandemic caused the most abrupt decline in employment in the history of this nation.5The lockdowns and other government restrictions on businesses severely limited work, education, and travel. In February 2020, over 60 percent of working-age people had a job or were looking for work, but by April it was closer to half that amount. The pandemic hit all sectors of the economy, but the toll was especially heavy on in-person, close-contact service industries—restaurants, hotels, airline travel, and retail businesses other than big box stores, grocery stores and pharmacies. These in-person service-industry jobs were considered more conducive to spreading COVID-19, they were more affected by government-mandated shutdowns and social distancing, and teleworking was generally not possible. Unlike any previous recession, the downturn in employment fell more heavily on women than men. The unemployment rates for men and women were essentially the same before the pandemic but ended up much higher for women.6That was very different from past recessions. For example, after the recession following the housing crisis, unemployment for prime working age men rose to 11 percent, compared to only 9 percent for prime age women.7 The women's labor force participation rate is another way to measure their presence in the workforce. Women have made significant progress in closing the gap with men since the 1960s, including in the five years before the pandemic, but that gap reopened after the onset of COVID-19.8The number of both prime working age men and women in the labor force plunged, but the drop was half a million larger for women. From what we know now, there appear to be two main reasons why the pandemic downturn affected women more than men. First, even after the dramatic employment gains over the past 50 years, women are still most often the primary caregivers to children and other family members. They shouldered most of the childcare burden from the COVID school closures. Second, a higher proportion of women worked in and continue to be employed in positions in the high-contact service sectors that were hit hardest by the pandemic. Caregiving burdens in the United States have always fallen more heavily on women. In the 20 years before the pandemic, roughly one-fourth of prime-age women with children didn't participate in the workforce. An even larger share of women with children under five were primarily engaged in childcare. Many women with children tend to cycle in and out of employment based on their family's childcare demands. Women are significantly affected by the summer childcare burdens of families with children. Each year between May and July, when schools close for the summer, the employment-to-population ratio for prime age women declines by more than a percentage point and then rebounds when schools reopen in the fall. That difference is one-third of the total drop that prime-age women experienced following a very bad recession, the one following the housing crisis.9 Today, working women still carry out most childcare responsibilities. One study conducted before the pandemic found that when both parents work, women spend 50 percent more time on childcare than men.10And when the pandemic closed many schools, it was largely women who stayed home. Women with children saw their labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio fall more than for women without children, while men were much less affected regardless of whether they had children. According to one Federal Reserve study, increased caregiving burdens for mothers with school aged children accounted for about three-fourths of the decline in women in the labor force from February 2020 to August 2021 but only about one-third of the decline for fathers.11Even after most children returned to in-person schooling, caregiving continues to weigh on female participation in the labor force, likely because of increased care for elderly or ill family members.12 The other major factor affecting women during the pandemic was the larger number of female employees in high-contact service-sector jobs, where demand dropped sharply during the pandemic and the government-imposed restrictions in response to COVID-19. During past recessions, women experienced fewer job losses because service-sector jobs were more stable in downturns. Historically, goods-producing industries were harder hit, and men, who tended to hold these roles, were more likely to lose their jobs.13But during the pandemic, it was service jobs that were more likely to be lost. Before the pandemic, more than 75 percent of these workers were women. Between February and April 2020, service sector employment fell 40 percent. Job losses in other industries with greater proportions of male workers, like manufacturing, were much smaller. We have also seen recovery in service-sector jobs lag behind other sectors. Employment in industries that tend to have larger shares of female workers, such as leisure and hospitality, education, and health services, is still below pre-pandemic levels. The losses for women are even larger when considering how fast these industries were growing before the pandemic. The shift to remote work may have been a mitigating factor for employment for women without college degrees. Overall, workers without college degrees were hit particularly hard by the pandemic recession because remote work was much more common for those with a degree.14However, women without degrees were affected less than men, probably because the jobs they held were more likely to be able to be performed remotely than those of men without college degrees.15 We have seen a substantial recovery in the labor market for both genders since the worst of the pandemic. By the end of 2020, unemployment rates had equalized, and the gap between gender participation rates had returned to pre-pandemic levels in 2021. However, because that gap had been narrowing in the five years prior to the onset of COVID, we can assume that the participation gap would have continued to decrease over that time. So, based on what we know about the history and recent experience of women in the labor market, what does the future hold for working women? On the demand side, the labor market continues to be strong and there are abundant job opportunities for workers of all education and skill levels. With about four million fewer people participating in the workforce today, there are still plenty of jobs available even if we see the number of job openings reduced. We are also seeing a larger number of women graduating from college than men, a development that is likely to help insulate women from job losses in future recessions. One complication is that the future of labor supply is uncertain, and it is difficult to predict how labor force participation will evolve. Factors like generational aging were already weighing on labor supply before the pandemic, and we saw millions of workers accelerate retirement during the pandemic, effectively retiring early. Even the strong labor market has not yet lured many of these early retirees back, and some believe that as time passes it becomes less likely that they will return. Over time, those who chose to leave the workforce early will move into a normal retirement age. We really don't know if gender will be a factor here as this is the first generation to retire that had large numbers of women in the workforce, but workforce aging is an important consideration when it comes to labor supply. We also don't know how the influence of inflation will affect decision making about returning to the workforce, but some may feel compelled to return to work. Another consideration is caregiving demands and how those responsibilities will be shared within households. While I hope that we never see a public health emergency like the one we've just been through, I hope that if we do, we can avoid the governmental decisions to intentionally disrupt foundational education and the unnecessary forced isolation of children. These policies have left a significant impact on this generation of children, on families and their decision making about many things including participation in the labor force. One ongoing labor supply issue relates to the lingering effects of COVID that can interfere with the ability to work or impose additional caregiving needs for family members. By one account, nearly a fifth of adults who contracted COVID reported ongoing symptoms of "long COVID," affecting significantly more women than men. At the same time, the number of working-age people with disabilities has increased significantly. While the number of Americans reporting a disability had been rising gradually over the past decade, the increase picked up in mid-2020, and about 2 million more people reported they had a disability in July 2022 than at the outset of the pandemic.16 Disability has been a major drag on the work force in rural areas in the past. Living in rural Kansas following the last recession, as I mentioned earlier, I am very familiar with the challenges that disability presents for many aspects of the community—beyond just economic conditions. Disability is also a significant challenge in Arkansas. Women's labor force attachment in Arkansas is below the national average. In the five years before the pandemic, about 72 percent of prime-age women here were either working or looking for work, compared with 75 percent nationally. This difference in labor force participation is primarily explained by illness or disability and existed long before the onset of COVID. There is no magic wand that will draw workers back into the labor force, especially when generous government benefits programs are provided for those who are capable of working. But as challenging as these issues are to address, there are some lessons to draw from experience and research regarding approaches that encourage people to work. Research suggests that assistance programs including job search assistance, training programs, and private-sector employment subsidies increase the likelihood of employment by up to 10 percent for those who utilize the programs.17The benefits of this assistance are not always immediately realized, but women were more likely to benefit from job training and private-sector employment programs. In conclusion, although we still have about 4 million people out of the pre-pandemic workforce, we continue to see strong employment gains and low unemployment rates—the kind of labor market that historically has pulled in more workers. As the service sector continues to recover and as schools and childcare establishments open more fully, I see potential for greater employment opportunities for women in the future. Obviously, economic conditions will influence job opportunities going forward. Today's high inflation and strong employment will likely create some pressure on labor and employment. 1. These remarks reflect my views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Federal Reserve staff members Nick Carollo, Wendy Dunn, Charles Fleischman and Stacey Tevlin for their assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2. These remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 3. See Claudia Golden (2021),Career & Family: Women's Century-Long Journey Toward Equity(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).Return to text 4. See Claudia Goldin (2006), "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family,"American Economic Review,vol. 96 (2), pp. 1–21.Return to text 5. In just two months, the unemployment rate rose from 3.5 percent to 14.7 percent. While unemployment was higher during the Great Depression of the 1930s, it never rose this quickly.Return to text 6. Unemployment rose to 16.1 percent for women but only 13.5 percent for men in April 2020.Return to text 7. The U.S. Department of Labor define prime age workers as those 25-54.Return to text 8. Part of the reason women closed the participation gap with prime working age men after 1965 is that participation by this cohort of men gradually declined. Major reasons for this decline in prime age male participation likely were increasing trade, globalization, and technological changes that reduced the number of manufacturing jobs, which were held primarily by men.Return to text 9. See Brendan Price and Melanie Wasserman (2022), "The Summer Drop in Female Employment (PDF)," CESifo Working Paper 9783 (Munich: CESifo, June).Return to text 10.https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/10/01/women-more-than-men-adjust-their-careers-for-family-life/.Return to text 11. Montes, Joshua, Christopher Smith and Isabel Leigh. 2021. "Caregiving for Children and Parental Labor Force Participation during the Pandemic." FEDS Notes, Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 12. Montes, Smith and Leigh (2021).Return to text 13. Albanese and Sahin (2018).Return to text 14. Around 62 percent of college education workers worked remotely in May 2020. See Claudia Goldin (2022), "Understanding the Economic Impact of COVID-19 on Women (PDF)." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring.Return to text 15. 25 percent of non-college women worked remotely at that time, compared with 14 percent of non-college men. Goldin (2022).Return to text 16. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2022), "Population—With a Disability, 16 Years and Over," retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 5.Return to text 17. See David Card, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber (2018), "What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active Labor Market Program Evaluations,"Journal of the European Economic Association,vol. 16 (June), pp. 894–931, https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article/16/3/894/4430618.Return to text