The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, or CDIAC, and the president and vice president of the council for 2022. CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C. Further information on the CDIAC can be foundhere. David R. Melville III, chief executive officer and president of b1BANK, Baton Rouge, La., will serve as CDIAC president in 2022. Jeane M. Vidoni, president and chief executive officer of Penn Community Bank, Perkasie, Pa., will serve as vice president. The other members of CDIAC in 2022 are: Melodie CarlsonChief Operating OfficerSunrise BanksSt. Paul, Minn. Kim DeVorePresident and Chief Executive OfficerJonah Bank of WyomingCasper, Wyo. Dabney T.P. Gilliam, Jr.President and Chief Executive OfficerThe Bank of Charlotte CountyPhenix, Va. Tracy HarrisPresident and Chief Executive OfficerNational Bank and TrustLa Grange, Texas Kent A. LiechtyPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Bank of BerneBerne, Ind. Faheem A. MasoodPresident and Chief Executive OfficerESL Federal Credit UnionRochester, N.Y. Margaret OldnerChief Executive OfficerStone BankLittle Rock, Ark. Janet SilveriaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerCommunity Bank of Santa MariaSanta Maria, Calif. Chuck SulerzyskiPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPeoples BankMarietta, Ohio Kathryn G. UnderwoodPresident and Chief Executive OfficerLedyard National BankHanover, N.H. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday finalized a technical rule that will streamline reporting requirements for member banks related to their subscriptions to Federal Reserve Bank capital stock. The final rule is substantially similar to the proposal. In particular, the final rule amends Regulation I to reduce the quarterly reporting burden for member banks by automating the application process for adjusting their subscriptions to Federal Reserve Bank capital stock, except in the context of mergers. The rule will be effective 30 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, contact 202-452-2955 or[email protected]. Federal Registernotice: Federal Reserve Bank Capital Stock (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by BAWAG P.S.K. Bank für Arbeit und Wirtschaft und Österreichische Postsparkasse Aktiengesellschaft, Vienna, Austria, to establish a representative office in Venice, California. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Old National Bancorp, Evansville, Indiana, to acquire First Midwest Bancorp, Inc., and indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, First Midwest Bank, both of Chicago, Illinois. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the designation of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2022. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as Chair and a second as Deputy Chair. In recent years, the Federal Reserve System has worked to increase the overall diversity of the Reserve Bank and branch boards of directors and continues to build on those efforts. To that end, the Board updated information on its website about thegender and race/ ethnicity of Reserve Bank boards of directorsand about thesectors represented by those directors. Similar details about Reserve Bank branch boards of directors will be published in the coming weeks. Following are the names of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs designated by the Board for 2022: BostonChristina Hull Paxson, president, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, renamed Chair. Corey Thomas, chairman and chief executive officer, Rapid7, LLC, Boston, Massachusetts, renamed Deputy Chair. New YorkRosa M. Gil, founder, president, and chief executive officer, Comunilife, Inc., New York, New York, named Chair. Vincent Alvarez, president, New York City Central Labor Council, AFL-CIO, New York, New York, named Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaMadeline Bell, president and chief executive officer, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. Anthony Ibarguen, chief executive officer, Quench USA, Inc., King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chair. ClevelandDwight E. Smith, president and chief executive officer, Sophisticated Systems, Inc., Columbus, Ohio, renamed Chair. Doris Carson Williams, president and chief executive officer, African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chair. RichmondEugene A. Woods, president and chief executive officer, Atrium Health, Charlotte, North Carolina, renamed Chair. Jodie W. McLean, chief executive officer, EDENS, Washington, D.C., renamed Deputy Chair. AtlantaElizabeth A. Smith, former executive chair, Bloomin' Brands, Inc., Tampa, Florida, renamed Chair. Claire Lewis Arnold, chief executive officer, Leapfrog Services, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Deputy Chair. ChicagoHelene D. Gayle, M.D., president and chief executive officer, The Chicago Community Trust, Chicago, Illinois, named Chair. Jennifer F. Scanlon, president and chief executive officer, UL Inc., Northbrook, Illinois, named Deputy Chair. St. LouisJames M. McKelvey, Jr., founder and chief executive officer, Invisibly, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, named Chair. Carolyn Chism Hardy, president and chief executive officer, Chism Hardy Investments, LLC, Bartlett, Tennessee, named Deputy Chair. MinneapolisSrilata Zaheer, dean, Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, renamed Chair. Chris Hilger, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Securian Financial, St. Paul, Minnesota, named Deputy Chair. Kansas CityEdmond Johnson, president and chief executive officer, Premier Manufacturing, Inc. and president and chief executive officer, eNFUSION, Frederick, Colorado, renamed Chair. Patrick A. Dujakovich, president, Greater Kansas City AFL-CIO, Kansas City, Missouri, renamed Deputy Chair. DallasThomas J. Falk, retired chairman and chief executive officer, Kimberly-Clark Corporation, Dallas, Texas, named Chair. Claudia Aguirre, president and chief executive officer, BakerRipley, Houston, Texas, named Deputy Chair. San FranciscoTamara L. Lundgren, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc., Portland, Oregon, named Chair. David P. White, immediate past chief executive officer and current strategic advisor, Screen Actors Guild (SAG-AFTRA), Los Angeles, California, and current venture partner, Ulu Ventures, Palo Alto, California, named Deputy Chair. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced preliminary financial information indicating that the Reserve Banks had estimated net income of $107.8 billion during 2021, of which $107.4 billion was remitted to the U.S. Treasury as required under the Federal Reserve Act. The Federal Reserve Act requires the Reserve Banks to remit excess earnings to the U.S. Treasury after providing for operating expenses, payment of dividends, and the amount necessary to maintain surplus. The 2021 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published later this year and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Banks' 2021 estimated net income of $107.8 billion is an increase of $19.3 billion from 2020. The increase is primarily from a $25.1 billion increase in interest income associated with U.S. Treasury securities, offset by decreases in interest income on federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) mortgage-backed securities (MBS) of $2.7 billion, and a decrease of $3.4 billion in the annual amount of net gain or loss that results from the daily revaluation of foreign currency denominated asset holdings at current exchange rates. Net income for 2021 was derived primarily from interest income on securities acquired through open market operations—U.S. Treasury securities, federal agency and GSE MBS, and GSE debt securities of $122.4 billion. It was offset by interest expense associated with reserve balances held by depository institutions of $5.3 billion, foreign currency revaluation losses of $1.9 billion, and interest expense of $414 million on securities sold under agreement to repurchase. The Federal Reserve Banks realized net income of $275 million from facilities established in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Operating expenses of the Reserve Banks, excluding amounts reimbursed by the U.S. Treasury and other entities for services the Reserve Banks provided as fiscal agents, totaled $5.3 billion in 2021. In addition, the Reserve Banks were assessed $1.0 billion for the costs related to producing, issuing, and retiring currency, $970 million for Board expenditures, and $628 million to fund the operations of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Additional earnings were derived from income from services of $457 million. Statutory dividends totaled $583 million in 2021. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2012 through 2021 (estimated). For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Note: The value shown for the Federal Reserve’s 2021 estimated remittances to the U.S. Treasury in the chart above was incorrect at the time of publication and was corrected Jan. 14, 2022. The information contained in the above press release was accurate.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday invited public comment on proposed guidance to implement a framework for the supervision of certain insurance organizations overseen by the Board. The proposed supervisory framework—for depository institution holding companies significantly engaged in insurance activities—would apply guidance and allocate supervisory resources based on the risk of a firm. It would also formalize a supervisory rating system for these companies and describe how examiners work with state insurance regulators. The proposed guidance would apply to any depository institution holding company that is an insurance underwriting company or that has over 25 percent of its consolidated assets held by insurance underwriting subsidiaries. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board Memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Framework for the Supervision of Insurance Organizations
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Allegiant United Holdings, LLC, Irvine, California; Nano Financial Holdings, Inc., Irvine, California; and Nano Banc, Irvine, CaliforniaCease and Desist Order dated January 18, 2022 The Federal Reserve Board also announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Iowa Prairie Bank, Brunsville, IowaWritten Agreement dated April 20, 2021 (PDF)Terminated January 4, 2022 Mariner's Bancorp, Edgewater, New JerseyWritten Agreement dated May 25, 2012 (PDF)Terminated January 6, 2022 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent Prohibition against Denise CalderFormer employee Cecil Bank, Elkton, MarylandMisappropriation of customer funds Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Note:On February 9, 2022, the consent prohibition order was updated to include the order's effective date.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition order against Tylifa A. MiltonFormer institution-affiliated party of M&T Bank, Buffalo, New YorkUnauthorized use of corporate credit card and fabrication of documents and bank records Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released a discussion paper that examines the pros and cons of a potential U.S. central bank digital currency, or CBDC. It invites comment from the public and is the first step in a discussion of whether and how a CBDC could improve the safe and effective domestic payments system. The paper does not favor any policy outcome. "We look forward to engaging with the public, elected representatives, and a broad range of stakeholders as we examine the positives and negatives of a central bank digital currency in the United States," Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell said. The paper summarizes the current state of the domestic payments system and discusses the different types of digital payment methods and assets that have emerged in recent years, including stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies. It concludes by examining the potential benefits and risks of a CBDC, and identifies specific policy considerations. Consumers and businesses have long held and transferred money in digital forms, via bank accounts, online transactions, or payment apps. The forms of money used in those transactions are liabilities of private entities, such as commercial banks. Conversely, a CBDC would be a liability of a central bank, like the Federal Reserve. While a CBDC could provide a safe, digital payment option for households and businesses as the payments system continues to evolve, and may result in faster payment options between countries, there may also be downsides. They include how to ensure a CBDC would preserve monetary and financial stability as well as complement existing means of payment. Other key policy considerations include how to preserve the privacy of citizens and maintain the ability to combat illicit finance. The paper discusses these and other factors in more detail. To fully evaluate a potential CBDC, the Board's paper asks for public comment on more than 20 questions. Comments will be accepted for 120 days and can be submittedhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) Feedback Form
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between November 5, 2021, and November 19, 2021, and includes responses from banks that held approximately three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. Information about the survey is available on the Board'swebsite. The November 2021 survey is attached. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings on December 6 and December 15, 2021. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Note:On October 18, 2022, updates were made to add the November 15, 2021, minutes, which were inadvertently omitted from a previous posting.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 14–15, 2021. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 14-15, 2021:HTML|PDF
Governor Lael Brainard Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to appear before you. I am greatly honored to be nominated by President Biden to serve as Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. If confirmed to this position, I look forward to continuing to work with members of this Committee. We are seeing the strongest rebound in growth and decline in unemployment of any recovery in the past five decades. Over the past year, unemployment has fallen by 2.8 percentage points, and growth is estimated to be around 5 1/2 percent, according to a variety of private forecasts. But inflation is too high, and working people around the country are concerned about how far their paychecks will go. Our monetary policy is focused on getting inflation back down to 2 percent while sustaining a recovery that includes everyone. This is our most important task. When the pandemic struck in 2020, I worked closely alongside Chair Powell and Secretary Mnuchin and many others, with the support of Congress, to calm financial market turmoil and save American jobs and businesses. When markets stabilized, I worked to responsibly wind down the emergency facilities we established. Today the economy is making welcome progress, but the pandemic continues to pose challenges. Our priority is to protect the gains we have made and support a full recovery. Since 2014, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, I have supported monetary policy that is responsive to evolving economic conditions. Our approach helped sustain the longest recovery on record with low inflation and millions of jobs. More broadly, I have worked to safeguard and grow our economy during the Administrations of five Presidents from both parties. I have worked on the U.S. policy response to every major financial crisis over three decades. I served at the Department of the Treasury as part of the team responsible for supporting America's recovery from the Global Financial Crisis and responding to the euro-area financial crisis. I served at the White House as part of the team helping to safeguard the American economy from the Asian financial crisis as well as financial crises in Mexico, Brazil, and Russia. In some foreign countries, I saw up close how high inflation hurts workers and families, especially the most vulnerable. I am committed to pursuing the Federal Reserve's congressionally mandated goals of price stability and maximum employment and to maintaining the strength and resilience of our financial system. I am committed to the independent and nonpartisan status of the Federal Reserve. If confirmed, I look forward to supporting Chair Powell in carrying out the responsibilities assigned to the Federal Reserve and in fostering transparent communication and accountability to you and the American people. I will bring a considered and independent voice to our deliberations, drawing on insights from working people, businesses, financial institutions, and communities—large and small—across the country. I will support policies that are in the interests of the American people and based on the law and careful analysis of the evidence. Before closing, I want to thank my husband and daughters for their steadfast support of my work. And I would like to commend the outstanding efforts of the individuals across the Federal Reserve System who work so hard every day to serve the American public. Senators, I thank you for this opportunity to appear before you and for considering my nomination. I would be pleased to respond to any questions.
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I would like to thank President Biden for nominating me to serve a second term as Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I would also like to thank my colleagues throughout the Federal Reserve System for their dedication, perseverance, and tireless work on behalf of the American people. Their commitment and expertise were essential to the Fed's response to the COVID-19 crisis and remain vital to the implementation of monetary policy as our economy continues to progress. Particular thanks go to my wife, Elissa Leonard, and our three children, Susie, Lucy, and Sam. Their love and support make possible everything I do. My five siblings are all watching, and we are thinking of each other and of our parents today with love and gratitude. Four years ago, when I sat before this Committee, few could have predicted the great challenges that would soon become ours to meet. On the eve of the pandemic, the U.S. economy was enjoying its 11th year of expansion, the longest on record. Unemployment was at 50-year lows, and the economic benefits were reaching those most on the margins. No obvious financial or economic imbalances threatened the ongoing expansion. But this attractive picture turned virtually overnight as the virus swept across the globe. The initial contraction was the fastest and deepest on record, but the pain could have been much worse. As the pandemic arrived, our immediate challenge was to stave off a full-scale depression, which would require swift and strong policy actions from across government. Congress provided by far the fastest and largest response to any postwar economic downturn. At the Federal Reserve, we used the full range of policy tools at our disposal. We moved quickly to restore vital flows of credit to households, communities, and businesses and to stabilize the financial system. These collective policy actions, the development and availability of vaccines, and American resilience worked in concert, first to cushion the pandemic's economic blows and then to spark a historically strong recovery. Today the economy is expanding at its fastest pace in many years, and the labor market is strong. As always, challenges remain. Both the initial shutdown and the subsequent reopening of the economy were without precedent. The economy has rapidly gained strength despite the ongoing pandemic, giving rise to persistent supply and demand imbalances and bottlenecks, and thus to elevated inflation. We know that high inflation exacts a toll, particularly for those less able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are strongly committed to achieving our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. We will use our tools to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. We can begin to see that the post-pandemic economy is likely to be different in some respects. The pursuit of our goals will need to take these differences into account. To that end, monetary policy must take a broad and forward-looking view, keeping pace with an ever-evolving economy. Over the past four years, my colleagues and I have continued the work of our predecessors to ensure a strong and resilient financial system. We increased capital and liquidity requirements for the largest banks—and currently, capital and liquidity levels at our largest, most systemically important banks are at multidecade highs. We worked to improve the public's access to instant payments, intensified our focus and supervisory efforts on evolving threats such as climate change and cyberattacks, and expanded our analysis and monitoring of financial stability. We will remain vigilant about new and emerging threats. We also updated our monetary policy framework, drawing on insights from people and communities across the country, to reflect the challenges of conducting policy in an era of persistently low interest rates. Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve important goals and has given us considerable independence in using our tools to achieve them. In our democratic system, that independence comes with the responsibility of transparency and clear communication, to keep the public informed and enable effective legislative oversight. That duty takes on even greater significance when the Fed must take extraordinary actions in times of crisis. In order to facilitate that transparency, and to earn your trust and that of the American people, I have made it a priority to meet regularly and frequently with you and your elected colleagues. I commit to continuing that practice if I am confirmed to another term. The Federal Reserve works for all Americans. We know our decisions matter to every person, family, business, and community across the country. I am committed to making those decisions with objectivity, integrity, and impartiality, based on the best available evidence, and in the long-standing tradition of monetary policy independence. That pledge lies at the heart of the Fed's mission and is one we all make when we answer the call to public service. I make it here again, with force and without reservation. Everything we do at the Federal Reserve is in pursuit of the goals set for us by Congress. I am honored to have worked in service to those ends since I joined the Fed in 2012, and as Chair for the past four years. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
Richard H. Clarida announced on Monday his intention to resign from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on January 14, 2022. He has been a member of the Board and Vice Chair since September 17, 2018. "Rich's contributions to our monetary policy deliberations, and his leadership of the Fed's first-ever public review of our monetary policy framework, will leave a lasting impact in the field of central banking," said Chair Jerome H. Powell. "I will miss his wise counsel and vital insights." During Dr. Clarida's time on the Board, he served as chair of the Board's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which oversees the work of the divisions of Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and International Finance. He also served as chair of the Federal Open Market Committee's communication subcommittee. In that role, he led the 2019 review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, and he oversaw the creation of the Fed Listens initiative. Dr. Clarida has also represented the Board internationally, including at the Bank for International Settlements, the Group of 20, the Group of Seven, the International Monetary Fund, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Prior to his appointment to the Board, Dr. Clarida served as the C. Lowell Harriss Professor of Economics and International Affairs at Columbia University, where he taught from 1988 to 2018. From 1997 until 2001, Clarida served as chairman of the Department of Economics at Columbia University. In addition to his academic experience, Dr. Clarida served as Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of the Treasury for Economic Policy from February 2002 to May 2003, where he was awarded the Treasury Medal in recognition of his service. He also served on the Council of Economic Advisers under President Reagan. Dr. Clarida received a B.S. in economics from the University of Illinois with Bronze Tablet honors and a M.A. and Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University. Dr. Clarida is married with two children. A copy of his resignation letter is attached. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.