Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation announced on Wednesday the results of their joint review of the resolution plans—also known as living wills—that the eight largest and most complex domestic banking organizations submitted in 2021. Resolution plans must describe a financial company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution in bankruptcy in the event of its material financial distress or failure. The agencies identified a shortcoming in Citigroup Inc.'s resolution plan and did not identify any other shortcomings or deficiencies in the plans from the other banking organizations. A shortcoming is a weakness that raises questions about the feasibility of the plan and could result in additional requirements if not corrected, but is not as severe as a deficiency. In Citigroup's resolution plan, the agencies found a shortcoming related to data quality and data management concerns previously identified by the Board in its October 2020 enforcement action. The agencies previously identified shortcomings in the 2019 plans of Bank of America Corporation, The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, State Street Corporation, and Wells Fargo & Company, related to the ability of each firm to reliably produce, in stressed conditions, data needed to execute its resolution strategy. The agencies determined that the 2021 resolution plans of these firms successfully addressed those shortcomings. The agencies have provided feedback letters to each of the firms. The letters note continued development of firms' resolution strategies and capabilities and the expectation that work will continue. The feedback letters also note the expectation that the next plan review will include expanded testing of the firm's resolution capabilities. For Citigroup the letter describes the specific weaknesses resulting in the shortcoming and the actions required by the agencies. A plan to address the shortcoming is due to the agencies by January 31, 2023. Bank of America Corporation 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Bank of New York Mellon Corporation 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Citigroup Inc. 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) The Goldman Sachs Group 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) JPMorgan Chase & Co. 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Morgan Stanley 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) State Street Corporation 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Wells Fargo & Company 2021 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF)
Princeton University won the 19th annual nationalCollege Fed Challengeon Friday, a team competition that encourages undergraduate students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. The team, from Princeton, New Jersey, represented the Philadelphia Federal Reserve District and included Lauren Fahlberg, Noah Harrigan, Shivani Prusty, Shirley (Yilin) Ren, and Richard Zhu. The team's advisers were Alan Blinder, William Dudley, and Carolyn Wilkins. The College Fed Challenge was held virtually in 2022.Eighty-fourschools from across the country submitted video presentations or participated in local virtual competitions starting on October 6, 2022. Eighteen semi-finalist teams participated in question-and-answer sessions held during the week of November 7. Six finalists were selected, and their presentations and questions and answers were reviewed to determine the winners. The other national finalists were University of North Carolina Wilmington in second place and Dartmouth College in third place. Teams with honorable mentions include Colgate University, University of Notre Dame, and University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA). "We want to encourage people who want to make a difference, at every stage of their careers, to consider public service," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell. "These students view the issues we face as a country from their own perspectives, and those fresh views and understanding are valuable." Teams were evaluated on economic analysis, responses to judges' questions, teamwork, and presentation. The judges for the final round of the competition were: Rick Mattoon, Vice President and Regional Executive, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago; Dan Li, Assistant Director, Program Direction, Division of Monetary Affairs; and Robert Tetlow, Senior Adviser, Program Direction, Division of Monetary Affairs. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced technical details related to reserve requirements for depository institutions. The annual indexation and publication of these amounts are required by law and does not indicate a change in depository institutions' reserve requirements, which will remain zero. If reserve requirement ratios were not zero, these amounts would be used to determine the different ranges of reserve requirement ratios that could apply, depending on the amount of transaction account balances at a depository institution. The reserve requirement exemption amount will be set at $36.1 million, up from $32.4 million in 2022, and the low reserve tranche will be set at $691.7 million, up from $640.6 million in 2022. The adjustments to both of these amounts are derived using formulas specified in the Federal Reserve Act. The adjustments will apply beginning January 1, 2023. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced pricing, effective January 3, 2023, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to depository institutions, such as the clearing of checks, ACH transactions, and wholesale payment and settlement services. By law, the Federal Reserve must establish fees to recover the costs of providing payment services over the long run. The Reserve Banks expect to fully recover 100.2 percent of actual and imputed expenses in 2023, including the return on equity that would have been earned if a private-sector firm provided the services. Overall, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes for 2023 will result in a 2.9 percent average price increase. The Board also announced the 2023 pricing for the FedNowSMService, a real-time payments platform, which is targeted to launch between May and July next year. The pricing is substantially similar to the anticipated pricing announced onJanuary 27, 2022. In addition, the Board approved the 2023 private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) of $23.7 million for Reserve Bank priced services. The PSAF is an allowance for income taxes and other imputed expenses that would have been paid and the return on equity that would have been earned if the Reserve Banks' priced services were provided by a private business. The 2023 fee schedule for each of the priced services, including the FedNow Service, is listed in the attached Federal Register notice and will be published on FRBservices.orgSM. For media inquiries, email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice:Federal Reserve Bank Services
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Agricultural Bank of China, Beijing, People's Republic of China, and Agricultural Bank of China, New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order, dated September 28, 2016 (PDF)Terminated October 24, 2022 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Cecil Bancorp, Inc., Elkton, Maryland and Cecil Bank, Elkton, MarylandWritten Agreement, dated June 29, 2010 (PDF)Terminated November 3, 2022 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Thursday that it approved action on by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and Kansas City increasing the discount rate, specifically the primary credit rate, at the Banks from 3-1/4 percent to 4 percent, effective November 3. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday invited public comment on a proposal to publish a periodic list of depository institutions that have access to Federal Reserve accounts—often referred to as "master accounts"—and payment services. The proposal would result in a transparent and accessible source of this information for the public. InAugust,the Board adopted final guidelines that establish a transparent, risk-based, and consistent set of factors for Reserve Banks to use in reviewing requests to access these accounts and payment services. "Today's proposal will enhance transparency to the public by periodically publishing a comprehensive list of financial institutions that have access to Federal Reserve accounts and payment services," said Vice Chair Lael Brainard. "I look forward to getting feedback on this proposal for enhanced transparency." The proposal issued today would build on the transparency of the guidelines by requiring Reserve Banks to periodically disclose which depository institutions have access to their accounts and payment services. Comments will be accepted for 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Guidelines for Evaluating Account and Services Requests
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Financial Literacy and Education Commission Public Meeting, Financial Literacy and Education Commission, Washington, DC (via webcast) Good morning. It is a pleasure to join today's meeting, I appreciate the invitation from the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC) to speak to this important intergovernmental body on these critical issues. I especially appreciate that I am able to participate virtually this morning. The FLEC's efforts to coordinate and elevate the agencies work to advance financial education is critical in furthering progress toward the goal of broad-based financial literacy. Providing consumers with the necessary tools and information to help them make sound financial decisions enhances economic well-being for everyone. The Federal Reserve ensures that our work contributes to this overarching goal—bringing together the efforts of the Board of Governors and the Reserve Banks to enhance the relationship between economic well-being, financial education and access to the financial system. Access to financial education provides the foundation for the success of this work and helps to further the Fed's broader goal of promoting a healthy economy. Consumers make better informed decisions when they understand the consequences of their financial decisions. Better decisions lead to more opportunity to build financial capacity that establishes credit, leading to savings and other wealth-building activities. Financial education provides consumers with critical skills that enable them to evaluate options and make sound decisions. In today's challenging economic environment, the Federal Reserve is helping to build a broad understanding of fundamental economic principles. We have undertaken a variety of efforts to strengthen resources for teachers and communities including our federalreserveeducation.org website which provides teachers with online resources about personal finance and economics, for all students from kindergarten to college. Other programs, like the Philadelphia Fed's Keys to Financial Success curriculum and the St. Louis Fed's economic education guides and videos, support students through knowledge and skills development to understand how economics impacts their day-to-day lives.1 We all know that the financial services marketplace is vast and that it evolves very quickly, offering consumers a wide and growing range of choices among financial products and providers. As a result, it is important that small businesses and consumers are prepared with information and resources to guide their personal financial decisions. The benefits are potentially limitless when consumers understand how their financial choices affect their current and future financial security. In addition to broad-based outreach, I would also like to emphasize the opportunity that financial education provides to advance our shared goal of financial inclusion. Today, I will discuss three important aspects of the Fed's inclusion efforts that helps to inform policies and practices designed to advance financial access and capability: Access to a banking account; the availability of responsible small-dollar lending products for short term financial needs; and expanded reach of financial initiatives to Indigenous and native communities to more effectively assist in providing access to the broader financial economy. We have made significant progress in providing greater access to bring the unbanked into the insured depository space. Our research gives us insight into the success of recent efforts to expand access among unbanked populations. For example, the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) showed in 2021 that 94 percent of adults have a bank or credit union account, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's 2021 National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households found that 95.5 percent of all U.S. households were banked, which is the highest level since the survey began in 2009.2 The Fed's Survey of Consumer Finances shows similar results. From 1989 to 2019, the percentage of U.S. adults with bank accounts rose from 85.6 to 94.5 percent. This is also true in the increased number of bank accounts owned by members of minority groups over the same time period, especially for Black and Hispanic consumers. Black adults increased bank account ownership from 56.7 to 86.8 percent and Hispanics increased from 63.5 to 89.5 percent. Though these surveys show significant improvement over the past decades, there is still further progress to make. In fact, our SHED survey data helps to identify characteristics of those who may choose not to use a deposit account or do not have access to one. The most recent survey results show that income and education may also play a factor—among the respondents, 24 percent of adults who have not earned a high school diploma and 17 percent of adults making less than $25,000 a year did not own a deposit account. We also know that there are many factors that may lead consumers to choose not to engage in the banking system, whether from a distrust of the banking system or prior mishandling of a banking relationship being an impediment to account ownership. These broader gains in the number of consumers with bank accounts are an important measure of our collective success, particularly in an environment where consumers can access an ever-growing range of financial services. While there are a multitude of nonbank products and providers, none provide the reliability and protection of FDIC insurance for deposits. Bank accounts continue to be the safest and most reliable way to deposit and keep money and engage in a variety of transactions. These affordable, government insured banking relationships can help consumers and businesses manage their money—to save or spend as desired—and develop financial management skills through savings and payments. In addition, having a banking relationship may assist consumers borrowing money to invest in education, a home, vehicle or a business. The Federal Reserve continues to support expanding access to bank accounts through the Bank On program, which provides those without a banking relationship access to low- or no-cost deposit accounts. The St. Louis Fed's Bank On Data Hub reports national data for all banks that offer these Bank On program accounts. In 2022, more than 200 banks offered certified Bank On accounts. These accounts are now available at more than 46,000 U.S. bank and credit union branches. Like affordable banking services, responsible small-dollar lending products can play an important role in financial inclusion by helping meet immediate credit needs from emergency or unexpected expenses, temporary cash flow disruptions, or unplanned income shortfalls. Small-dollar loans are often a critical source of funding when economic stress occurs. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve and other agencies issued updated principles for banks to consider when offering responsible small-dollar loans. Successful programs incorporate repayment safeguards and seek to provide outcomes that enhance borrowers' financial capabilities. As loan markets continue to evolve, well-designed small-dollar loan products remain an important resource for consumers, helping to encourage positive credit practices and transition into additional financial products. I will conclude with a key element of the Federal Reserve's community engagement to broaden access to financial services so that more Americans can participate in the broader economy. Financial inclusion for all, including underserved communities, like Indigenous groups, is important for the economic strength of our country. Our efforts across multiple Federal Reserve System functions work to advance this goal. The Federal Reserve Board's Community Advisory Council offers diverse perspectives on economic circumstances and financial services needs of a range of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on low- and moderate-income populations. The Community Advisory Council has benefited from having representation from the Native American Indian community serving on the council and updating the members on current challenges and opportunities facing these communities. In addition, in 2021, the Federal Reserve joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion, which fosters ongoing dialogue and research to enhance the participation of Indigenous populations in the economy. Our efforts in this area emphasize the importance of education. In fact, the St. Louis Fed's Native Economic and Financial Education Empowerment program has provided economic and personal finance education for Native communities and organizations throughout the country since 2018.3 Recent research shows promising trends in access to bank accounts for Native American Alaskan and Indian communities, with over 93 percent of these households now holding a bank account, which is nearly a 10-percentage point increase from 2019. I am very pleased to see that these efforts and our commitment to bringing access to financial services to Indigenous communities have been beneficial. Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. I appreciate the opportunity to highlight the Federal Reserve's contributions to FLEC's mission of financial empowerment and I look forward to the insights from today's meeting. Note:A previous version of this speech incorrectly attributed statistics in paragraph 9 to the Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED). On November 17, this paragraph was updated to correctly attribute these numbers to the Survey of Consumer Finances. 1. See "Keys to Financial Success—Lessons and Curricula," Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and "Resources for Teachers and Students in Economics and Personal Finance," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2021 (PDF)" and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "2021 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF)".Return to text 3. See "Native Economic and Financial Education Empowerment (NEFEE)," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Today I will offer a progress report on the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) efforts to restore price stability to the U.S. economy for the benefit of the American people. The report must begin by acknowledging the reality that inflation remains far too high. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation is imposing significant hardship, straining budgets and shrinking what paychecks will buy. This is especially painful for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. We currently estimate that 12-month personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation through October ran at 6.0 percent (figure 1).1While October inflation data received so far showed a welcome surprise to the downside, these are a single month's data, which followed upside surprises over the previous two months. As figure 1 makes clear, down months in the data have often been followed by renewed increases. It will take substantially more evidence to give comfort that inflation is actually declining. By any standard, inflation remains much too high. For purposes of this discussion, I will focus my comments on core PCE inflation, which omits the food and energy inflation components, which have been lower recently but are quite volatile. Our inflation goal is for total inflation, of course, as food and energy prices matter a great deal for household budgets. But core inflation often gives a more accurate indicator of where overall inflation is headed. Twelve-month core PCE inflation stands at 5.0 percent in our October estimate, approximately where it stood last December when policy tightening was in its early stages. Over 2022, core inflation rose a few tenths above 5 percent and fell a few tenths below, but it mainly moved sideways. So when will inflation come down? I could answer this question by pointing to the inflation forecasts of private-sector forecasters or of FOMC participants, which broadly show a significant decline over the next year. But forecasts have been predicting just such a decline for more than a year, while inflation has moved stubbornly sideways. The truth is that the path ahead for inflation remains highly uncertain. For now, let's put aside the forecasts and look instead to the macroeconomic conditions we think we need to see to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. For starters, we need to raise interest rates to a level that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. There is considerable uncertainty about what rate will be sufficient, although there is no doubt that we have made substantial progress, raising our target range for the federal funds rate by 3.75 percentage points since March. As our last postmeeting statement indicates, we anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. It seems to me likely that the ultimate level of rates will need to be somewhat higher than thought at the time of the September meeting and Summary of Economic Projections. I will return to policy at the end of my comments, but for now, I will simply say that we have more ground to cover. We are tightening the stance of policy in order to slow growth in aggregate demand. Slowing demand growth should allow supply to catch up with demand and restore the balance that will yield stable prices over time. Restoring that balance is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth. Last year, the ongoing reopening of the economy boosted real gross domestic product (GDP) growth to a very strong 5.7 percent. This year, GDP was roughly flat through the first three quarters, and indicators point to modest growth this quarter, which seems likely to bring the year in with very modest growth overall. Several factors contributed to this slowing growth, including the waning effects of reopening and of pandemic fiscal support, the global implications of Russia's war against Ukraine, and our policy actions, which tightened financial conditions and are affecting economic activity, particularly in interest-sensitive sectors such as housing. We can say that demand growth has slowed, and we expect that this growth will need to remain at a slower pace for a sustained period. Despite the tighter policy and slower growth over the past year, we have not seen clear progress on slowing inflation. To assess what it will take to get inflation down, it is useful to break core inflation into three component categories: core goods inflation, housing services inflation, and inflation in core services other than housing (figure 2). Core goods inflation has moved down from very high levels over the course of 2022, while housing services inflation has risen rapidly. Inflation in core services ex housing has fluctuated but shown no clear trend. I will discuss each of these items in turn. Early in the pandemic, goods prices began rising rapidly, as abnormally strong demand was met by pandemic-hampered supply. Reports from businesses and many indicators suggest that supply chain issues are now easing. Both fuel and nonfuel import prices have fallen in recent months, and indicators of prices paid by manufacturers have moved down. While 12-month core goods inflation remains elevated at 4.6 percent, it has fallen nearly 3 percentage points from earlier in the year. It is far too early to declare goods inflation vanquished, but if current trends continue, goods prices should begin to exert downward pressure on overall inflation in coming months. Housing services inflation measures the rise in the price of all rents and the rise in the rental-equivalent cost of owner-occupied housing. Unlike goods inflation, housing services inflation has continued to rise and now stands at 7.1 percent over the past 12 months. Housing inflation tends to lag other prices around inflation turning points, however, because of the slow rate at which the stock of rental leases turns over.2The market rate on new leases is a timelier indicator of where overall housing inflation will go over the next year or so. Measures of 12-month inflation in new leases rose to nearly 20 percent during the pandemic but have been falling sharply since about midyear (figure 3). As figure 3 shows, however, overall housing services inflation has continued to rise as existing leases turn over and jump in price to catch up with the higher level of rents for new leases. This is likely to continue well into next year. But as long as new lease inflation keeps falling, we would expect housing services inflation to begin falling sometime next year. Indeed, a decline in this inflation underlies most forecasts of declining inflation. Finally, we come to core services other than housing. This spending category covers a wide range of services from health care and education to haircuts and hospitality. This is the largest of our three categories, constituting more than half of the core PCE index. Thus, this may be the most important category for understanding the future evolution of core inflation. Because wages make up the largest cost in delivering these services, the labor market holds the key to understanding inflation in this category. In the labor market, demand for workers far exceeds the supply of available workers, and nominal wages have been growing at a pace well above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time.3Thus, another condition we are looking for is the restoration of balance between supply and demand in the labor market. Signs of elevated labor market tightness emerged suddenly in mid-2021. The unemployment rate at the time was much higher than the 3.5 percent that had prevailed without major signs of tightness before the pandemic. Employment was still millions below its level on the eve of the pandemic. Looking back, we can see that a significant and persistent labor supply shortfall opened up during the pandemic—a shortfall that appears unlikely to fully close anytime soon. Comparing the current labor force with the Congressional Budget Office's pre-pandemic forecast of labor force growth reveals a current labor force shortfall of roughly 3-1/2 million people (figure 4, left panel).4This shortfall reflects both lower-than-expected population growth and a lower labor force participation rate (figure 4, right panel). Participation dropped sharply at the onset of the pandemic because of many factors, including sickness, caregiving, and fear of infection. Many forecasters expected that participation would move back up fairly quickly as the pandemic faded. And for workers in their prime working years, it mostly has. Overall participation, however, remains well below pre-pandemic trends. Some of the participation gap reflects workers who are still out of the labor force because they are sick with COVID-19 or continue to suffer lingering symptoms from previous COVID infections ("long COVID").5But recent research by Fed economists finds that the participation gap is now mostly due to excess retirements—that is, retirements in excess of what would have been expected from population aging alone.6These excess retirements might now account for more than 2 million of the 3‑1/2 million shortfall in the labor force.7 What explains these excess retirements? Health issues have surely played a role, as COVID has posed a particularly large threat to the lives and health of the elderly.8In addition, many older workers lost their jobs in the early stages of the pandemic, when layoffs were historically high. The cost of finding new employment may have appeared particularly large for these workers, given pandemic-related disruptions to the work environment and health concerns.9Also, gains in the stock market and rising house prices in the first two years of the pandemic contributed to an increase in wealth that likely facilitated early retirement for some people. The data so far do not suggest that excess retirements are likely to unwind because of retirees returning to the labor force. Older workers are still retiring at higher rates, and retirees do not appear to be returning to the labor force in sufficient numbers to meaningfully reduce the total number of excess retirees.10 The second factor contributing to the labor supply shortfall is slower growth in the working-age population. The combination of a plunge in net immigration and a surge in deaths during the pandemic probably accounts for about 1-1/2 million missing workers.11 Policies to support labor supply are not the domain of the Fed: Our tools work principally on demand. Without advocating any particular policy, however, I will say that policies to support labor force participation could, over time, bring benefits to the workers who join the labor force and support overall economic growth. Such policies would take time to implement and have their effects, however. For the near term, a moderation of labor demand growth will be required to restore balance to the labor market. Currently, the unemployment rate is at 3.7 percent, near 50-year lows, and job openings exceed available workers by about 4 million—that is about 1.7 job openings for every person looking for work (figure 5). So far, we have seen only tentative signs of moderation of labor demand. With slower GDP growth this year, job gains have stepped down from more than 450,000 per month over the first seven months of the year to about 290,000 per month over the past three months. But this job growth remains far in excess of the pace needed to accommodate population growth over time—about 100,000 per month by many estimates. Job openings have fallen by about 1.5 million this year but remain higher than at any time before the pandemic. Wage growth, too, shows only tentative signs of returning to balance. Some measures of wage growth have ticked down recently (figure 6). But the declines are very modest so far relative to earlier increases and still leave wage growth well above levels consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. To be clear, strong wage growth is a good thing. But for wage growth to be sustainable, it needs to be consistent with 2 percent inflation. Let's sum up this review of economic conditions that we think we need to see to bring inflation down to 2 percent. Growth in economic activity has slowed to well below its longer-run trend, and this needs to be sustained. Bottlenecks in goods production are easing and goods price inflation appears to be easing as well, and this, too, must continue. Housing services inflation will probably keep rising well into next year, but if inflation on new leases continues to fall, we will likely see housing services inflation begin to fall later next year. Finally, the labor market, which is especially important for inflation in core services ex housing, shows only tentative signs of rebalancing, and wage growth remains well above levels that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. Despite some promising developments, we have a long way to go in restoring price stability. Returning to monetary policy, my FOMC colleagues and I are strongly committed to restoring price stability. After our November meeting, we noted that we anticipated that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate in order to attain a policy stance that is sufficiently restrictive to move inflation down to 2 percent over time. Monetary policy affects the economy and inflation with uncertain lags, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. Thus, it makes sense to moderate the pace of our rate increases as we approach the level of restraint that will be sufficient to bring inflation down. The time for moderating the pace of rate increases may come as soon as the December meeting. Given our progress in tightening policy, the timing of that moderation is far less significant than the questions of how much further we will need to raise rates to control inflation, and the length of time it will be necessary to hold policy at a restrictive level. It is likely that restoring price stability will require holding policy at a restrictive level for some time. History cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done. ReferencesBureau of Labor Statistics (2022). "Worker Displacement: 2019–2021 (PDF)," press release, August 26. Camarota, Steven A., and Karen Zeigler (2022).Estimating the Illegal Immigrant Population Using the Current Population Survey.Washington: Center for Immigration Studies, March. Congressional Budget Office (2020).The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2020 to 2030 (PDF).Washington: CBO, January. Goda, Gopi Shah, and Evan J. Soltas (2022). "The Impacts of COVID-19 Illnesses on Workers (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 30435. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. Montes, Joshua, Christopher Smith, and Juliana Dajon (2022). " 'The Great Retirement Boom': The Pandemic-Era Surge in Retirements and Implications for Future Labor Force Participation," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-081. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Price, Brendan M. (2022). "Long COVID, Cognitive Impairment, and the Stalled Decline in Disability Rates," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 5. Sheiner, Louise, and Nasiha Salwati (2022). "How Much Is Long COVID Reducing Labor Force Participation? Not Much (So Far) (PDF)," Hutchins CenterWorking Paper 80. Washington: Brookings Institution,October. U.S. Customs and Border Protection (2022).CBP Enforcement Statistics: Fiscal Year 2022.Washington: CBP, November. U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2022).Legal Immigration and Adjustment of Status Report: Fiscal Year 2022, Quarter 2.Washington: Department of Homeland Security, October. 1. Throughout this discussion, PCE data for October are estimates based on the October consumer price index and producer price index data.Return to text 2. Rental lease data are also the main input into the measurement of owner-occupied housing prices.Return to text 3. The pace of wage inflation affects all sectors of the economy, but wages are a particularly large share of costs in core services ex housing and, thus, particularly important for inflation in this category.Return to text 4. See Congressional Budget Office (2020). To account for the effect of population controls on the level of the labor force, the shortfall is calculated by appending the Congressional Budget Office's January 2020 projected labor force growth over the years 2020–22 onto the level of the labor force in 2019:Q4 that is adjusted for population controls.Return to text 5. Recent research suggests that long COVID may be keeping 280,000 to 680,000 individuals aged 16 to 64 out of the labor force (Sheiner and Salwati, 2022), and long COVID may explain why the percentage of those aged 18 to 64 not in the labor force due to a disability has stalled over the past two years rather than continuing its pre-pandemic decline (see also Price, 2022).Return to text 6. See Montes, Smith, and Dajon (2022).Return to text 7. This analysis adjusts for population controls to the Current Population Survey. This adjustment is important, because while the unadjusted data show a marked decline in the retired share in January 2022, this drop is entirely an artifact of new population controls introduced in January. A proper assessment of the effects of retirements since the start of the pandemic needs to adjust the historical data for the effects of these population controls. See Montes, Smith, and Dajon (2022).Return to text 8. For example, see Goda and Soltas (2022).Return to text 9. Displaced workers aged 65 and over had markedly lower reemployment rates and markedly higher rates of labor force exit than did similarly aged displaced workers in the years just before the pandemic. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2022).Return to text 10. Among those 55 and over, transitions into retirement are currently well above the average rate in the three years before the pandemic (after adjusting for population controls). At the same time, retirees are returning to the labor force at a rate similar to that before the pandemic.Return to text 11. First, due primarily to COVID, mortality over the past few years has far exceeded what had been expected before the pandemic. This channel accounts for about 400,000 of the labor force shortfall. Total deaths due to COVID are much larger—about 1 million people. However, the effect on the labor force is smaller than this because COVID deaths have mostly been among older people, who participate in the labor force at lower rates than younger people. Second, due, at least in part, to pandemic-related restrictions on entry into the United States, total immigration has slowed substantially since the start of the pandemic, lowering the labor force by about 1 million people relative to pre-pandemic trends. While lawful, nonpermanent immigration (for example, H-1B and H-2B visa holders) has bounced back considerably since earlier in the pandemic, these categories of immigration are generally still below 2019 levels. Meanwhile, lawful permanent immigration (that is, new green card holders) is also somewhat lower than in 2019 and well below levels that prevailed earlier in the 2010s. Regarding undocumented immigration, while migrant encounters at the U.S.–Mexico border have been high lately, some estimates suggest the number of undocumented immigrants in the United States is not much different than in 2019. (For data on legal immigration, see U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2022; for data on border encounters, see U.S. Customs and Border Protection, 2022; for estimates of the number of undocumented immigrants, see Camarota and Zeigler, 2022.).Return to text i. Note: On December 2, 2022, a typo was corrected to change the month labels on Figure 3. Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from October 3 through November 2, 2022. The minutes are attached. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or email[email protected].
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 1–2, 2022. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 1-2, 2022:HTML|PDF
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the 2022 Institute Research Conference, hosted by the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota Good morning, and thank you. It is a pleasure to be here. I would like to use my time today to answer the question posed by the title of this session: What can the Fed learn from research on opportunity and inclusive growth? But, first, let me remind you that the views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. Some of the Fed's purview—including consumer protection, community development, and financial stability—can help to support inclusive growth. But monetary policy cannot address these issues directly. I do, however, see a direct line between research on opportunity and inclusive growth and our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Fulfillment of our mandate is likely easier if certain other conditions are present. For example, if the channels of upward social mobility are open and working for all, we are likely to see both higher labor market participation and higher productivity—both of which make it easier to attain maximum employment amid low and stable inflation. The better we understand the channels that affect the health and function of the overall economy, the better we can calibrate our policy decisions to deliver on our dual mandate. Those channels consist of several areas that are, largely, not ours to make policy about but are important for our policies to be effective in promoting the conditions for prosperity. They include health, housing, transportation, childcare, disability services, education, access to the financial system, and access to capital. First, I would like to address monetary policy. In pursuing its dual mandate, the Federal Reserve is essentially trying to foster and maintain the conditions in which the economy and all its participants can thrive. Research has shown that the benefits of a strong economy—with high employment and stable prices—are especially significant for less advantaged groups.1These groups also tend to see the greatest gains later in an expansion, meaning that they benefit the most from sustained periods of growth—like the expansion we were experiencing before the pandemic, which was the longest on record.2For example, during the pre-pandemic expansion, the long-standing disparity between unemployment rates for prime-age African Americans and Hispanics and their white counterparts began to close. In fact, disparities in labor market outcomes just prior to the onset of the pandemic were the narrowest in at least 50 years. At the same time, inflation remained low—lower, in fact, than our 2 percent target for most of that time—and showed little sign of picking up despite the strong labor market. Unfortunately, the pandemic brought about the most rapid and severe labor market contraction of the past 80 years. It also had a noticeably larger effect on the unemployment rates of women and of Black and Hispanic individuals than it did on most other demographic groups. And while job losses were widespread across all sectors of the economy, workers with less education were particularly hard hit. This was especially true for those unable to work remotely or in jobs that required in-person interactions. As the economy reopened and began to recover, unemployment rates for those groups initially affected the most—Black and Hispanic workers—also fell more sharply. Today, while material disparities in unemployment rates along racial lines persist, these disparities have almost returned to the narrower ranges we saw just before the pandemic. However, as the economy has recovered, strong demand and a variety of supply constraints have contributed to the fastest increases in consumer prices since the early 1980s. Inflation, too, has disproportionate effects on, and is felt most acutely by, those who can least afford it. Price increases have been particularly sharp for necessities like food, transportation, and shelter, which make up a substantial portion of household budgets for people on the lower end of the pay scale. Lower-income households also have less in savings to buffer price increases, meaning that they not only feel the effects more forcefully, but they also feel them immediately. The savings they do have are more likely to be in cash or noninterest-bearing accounts, which means inflation directly erodes the purchasing power of their savings. Monetary policy cannot address the specific reasons that low-income households suffer the most from high inflation. But these reasons help to illustrate the importance of low inflation: Low inflation is key to achieving a long and sustained expansion—an economy that works for all. Pursuing our dual mandate is the best way for the Federal Reserve to promote widely shared prosperity. At the same time, it is critical for monetary policymakers to understand the many and varied conditions that can make our policies more effective in fostering prosperity. Now let me turn to these concomitant conditions for prosperity outside of the Fed's mandate, which nevertheless should be carefully studied. Many of them are straightforward, like housing, transportation, and childcare. Even as remote work has increased, many jobs remain in person and on site. If people cannot live near work, either because of the cost or because jobs are located in nonresidential areas, they must commute. Commuting depends on public or personal transportation—which in turn relies on infrastructure, such as roads and highways. And time spent commuting affects childcare decisions. Caring responsibilities overall—for children or for other relatives—can keep people out of the workforce, and the onus falls disproportionately on women. This was particularly evident during the pandemic, and particularly true for Black and Hispanic mothers.3 Financial participation is also clearly connected to prosperity. Being unbanked means less financial security. Less access to credit means a smaller, or even nonexistent, safety net, but it also means less opportunity, be that buying a house to build capital, funding education, or starting a business. But there are other, less obvious—or even less quantifiable—issues. Beyond location, a home provides both basic needs, such as shelter, and invaluable benefits, such as a sense of personal safety and dignity. It is a refuge in which our minds and bodies can recuperate and regenerate so we are prepared to participate in all aspects of life, including the next day's work. The costs of living in disadvantaged areas or of dealing with financial hardship can be seen in all areas of life. Higher stress, the frequent necessity of working more than one job, the absence of benefits, and the time and money spent commuting—all these exact a financial and psychological toll. There is a fundamental aspect of our humanity, which is to live a more fulfilling existence—to enjoy the richness of life. In an economy that works for all, we should not live to work, but work to live. These are the factors that will allow people to thrive. Of course, policies that can address these important issues are not made by Fed policymakers. But the research agenda we are discussing today helps us to understand better those aspects of well-being that allow people to prosper and to enrich their lives more broadly. Thank you. 1. See Tomaz Cajner, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017), "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).Return to text 2. See, for example, Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Spring, pp. 333–75.Return to text 3. See Joshua Montes, Christopher Smith, and Isabel Leigh (2021), "Caregiving for Children and Parental Labor Force Participation during the Pandemic," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 5).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Barr submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives on November 16, 2022. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Earlier this year, I was honored to be sworn in as the Board's Vice Chair for Supervision. In this role, my priority is to make the banking system safer and fairer. That requires active and careful analysis of risks. The banking system is constantly evolving, so regulation and supervision must also adjust to respond to new and emerging risks. I am also committed to making the financial system fairer, which is fundamental to financial oversight. Households and businesses need access to safe and reliable banking services as they make their financial decisions. While safety and fairness may seem distinct, they are interwoven. Financial instability disproportionately harms those who are economically vulnerable, so making the financial system safer is making it fairer, and unfair practices can make the financial system riskier, as we saw in the Global Financial Crisis. I look forward to pursuing both of these goals during my time as Vice Chair for Supervision. Accompanying my testimony today is theFederalReserve's Supervision and Regulation Reportdetailing the current state of the banking system from our supervisory and regulatory perspective. My testimony will offer you an overview of the banking system's current conditions and highlight efforts to monitor and mitigate vulnerabilities. I will also provide updates on a number of priority issues that the Federal Reserve is seeking to address. Current ConditionsReforms following the Global Financial Crisis have helped the United States maintain a resilient financial system for consumers, businesses, and communities. Capital and liquidity positions remain above regulatory requirements. The Federal Reserve's supervisory stress test, conducted earlier this year, showed that large banks had sufficient capital to maintain their lending to support the economy through the stressful conditions simulated by the stress test. But as I mentioned, we must ensure we are keeping pace. Many issues at the forefront of banking regulation today were not prominent five or ten years ago, and some of them scarcely even existed. For instance, few anticipated a global pandemic, even economists who used epidemiological approaches to model financial contagion. Further, the recent events in crypto markets, while mostly occurring outside the banking sector, have highlighted the risks to investors and consumers associated with new and novel asset classes and activities when not accompanied by strong guardrails. In addition, despite the data depicting a generally healthy U.S. banking system, the domestic economic outlook has weakened amid tighter financial conditions and increased uncertainty. A weaker economy could put stress on households and businesses and, thus, on the banking system as a whole. Uncertainty has led to increased financial market volatility and may also reveal pockets of excess leverage and liquidity risk in the non-bank financial sector, which risks spillovers to the banking system and the real economy. We saw a host of such risks with the disruptions in the United Kingdom's gilt markets. The Federal Reserve will be heightening its focus on liquidity, credit, and interest-rate risks as supervised institutions manage the changing financial conditions. In the wake of the pandemic, the global recovery is uneven, inflation is far too high, and geopolitical events pose downside risks to the U.S. and other economies around the world. Russia's war of aggression is devastating for the people of Ukraine, and is also disrupting commodities, energy, and food markets, and pushing up inflation around the world. And these factors—along with China's economic slowing, associated with its inward turn, pandemic shutdowns, and contraction in its real estate sector—are weighing on global economic growth. We remain attentive to these and other developments and are closely supervising our regulated institutions to assess potential risks and implications for the stability of the U.S. and global financial systems. Supervisory and Regulatory Priorities Capital ReviewTurning to a number of our priorities at the Federal Reserve, I am taking a holistic look at the Fed's capital framework to assess whether it is functioning as intended and supports a resilient financial system. Robust capital and liquidity requirements make it more likely that banks are able to absorb losses and continue their vital role supporting households and businesses. This is especially important for the largest and most complex banks, which pose the greatest risk to U.S. financial stability. We are taking a look at the G-SIB surcharge, the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio, stress testing, the countercyclical capital buffer, and other measures. Within this context, I am committed to working with my colleagues at the other federal bank regulatory agencies in implementing enhanced regulatory capital requirements known as the "Basel III endgame" standards.1 When considering improvements to the regulatory capital framework, I will be guided by a few key principles: the capital framework should be forward-looking, should be tiered so that the highest standards apply to the riskiest firms, and should support a safer and fairer financial system. We will look at design choices that help to further these goals. ResolutionIn recent years, merger activity and organic growth have increased the size of large banks, which could complicate efforts by regulators to resolve those firms upon failure without disruption to customers and counterparties. The Board recently invited comment on an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to enhance regulators' ability to resolve large banks in an orderly way, should they fail. We look forward to the comments we will receive. Merger ReviewThe Federal Reserve is also evaluating our approach to reviewing banks' proposed acquisitions. Mergers are often a feature of vibrant sectors, but the advantages that firms seek to gain through mergers must be weighed against the risks that mergers can pose to competition, consumers, and financial stability. A merged institution may be able to provide a wider range of products and services at lower prices. But if there is concentration, mergers could also reduce competition and access to financial services through higher prices or a reduced range of services. In addition, mergers of larger, more complex firms may pose risks to financial stability. We are also required to evaluate whether a merger would meet the convenience and needs of the community. The Federal Reserve—along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)—is reviewing the issues to see if any adjustments to our approach would be appropriate. Crypto ActivityAnother priority is monitoring the risk of crypto-asset-related activities. Over the last several years, we have seen crypto-asset activity grow rapidly and experience periods of significant stress. Some financial innovations offer opportunities, but as we have recently seen, many innovations also carry risks—which can include liquidity runs, the rapid collapse of asset values, misuse of customer funds, fraud, theft, manipulation, and money laundering. These risks, if not well controlled, can harm retail investors and cut against the goals of a safe and fair financial system. Most of this activity is occurring outside of the ambit of banking regulation. But recent events remind us of the potential for systemic risk if interlinkages develop between the crypto system that exists today and the traditional financial system. Crypto-asset-related activity, requires effective oversight that includes safeguards to ensure that crypto companies are subject to similar regulatory safeguards as other financial services providers. I would note with some humility that striking the right balance between creating an environment that supports innovation and managing related risks to businesses, households, and the stability of the financial system is no easy task. We do not want to stifle innovation, but when regulation is lax or behind the curve, it can facilitate risk taking and a race to the bottom that puts consumers, businesses, and the economy in danger and discredits new products and services with consumers and investors. I believe everyone has a stake in getting the regulatory balance right. We are working closely with the OCC and the FDIC to assess the risks and opportunities posed by a range of crypto-asset-related activities, and to clarify which activities are legally permissible and can be conducted by banks in a manner that is consistent with safety and soundness, consumer protection, and overall stability of the financial system. Before leaving the topic of crypto-assets, I would like to touch on stablecoins. Stablecoins, which like other instruments that purport to be available on demand at par value, can be subject to destabilizing runs and require strong federal prudential oversight to mitigate their potential for economic harm. That is especially the case for stablecoins that aim to function as private money. Legislative action on crypto-assets in general, and stablecoins in particular, would help promote responsible innovation and protect the financial system. Climate-Related Financial RisksWe are also working to understand financial risks related to climate change. At the Federal Reserve, our mandate in this area is important, but narrow, and we are focused on our supervisory responsibilities and our role in promoting a safe and stable financial system. To that end, the Federal Reserve recently announced a pilot climate scenario analysis exercise designed to enhance the ability of supervisors and firms to measure and manage climate-related financial risks. Scenario analysis—in which the resilience of financial institutions is assessed under different hypothetical climate scenarios—is an emerging tool to assess climate-related financial risks. The pilot climate scenario analysis exercise, which is distinct and separate from bank stress tests, will be exploratory in nature and not have capital consequences. It is also our intention to work with the OCC and the FDIC to provide guidance to large banks on how we expect them to identify, measure, monitor, and manage the financial risks of climate change. Operational ResilienceThe last priority I will mention is operational resilience. Financial institutions face significant challenges from a wide range of disruptive events. These include technology-based failures, cyber incidents, pandemics, and natural disasters. Such events, combined with banks' growing reliance on third-party service providers, expose them to a range of operational risks, which are often difficult to anticipate. When they manifest, these risks can affect the safety and soundness of affected banks and pose risks to U.S. financial stability by limiting market functioning or undermining trust in the system. We at the Federal Reserve will continue to work in this area to help ensure that banks understand and manage these complex and evolving challenges and that consumers remain protected. Additionally, we are committed to working closely with other domestic agencies and international authorities to coordinate on supervisory approaches to operational resilience. ConclusionAs the banking system continues to evolve, we must ensure that supervision and regulation keeps up with those changes and are appropriate for the underlying risks. Over the coming months and years, it will be crucial to examine new risks to the banking system and whether and how the real economy, including consumer needs and access to financial services, may change. As vulnerabilities appear, a strong banking system will help households and businesses weather those challenges. As Vice Chair for Supervision, I will continue to work to promote a safe and fair banking system. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1.https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20220909a.htm.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Barr submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives on November 16, 2022. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Earlier this year, I was honored to be sworn in as the Board's Vice Chair for Supervision. In this role, my priority is to make the banking system safer and fairer. That requires active and careful analysis of risks. The banking system is constantly evolving, so regulation and supervision must also adjust to respond to new and emerging risks. I am also committed to making the financial system fairer, which is fundamental to financial oversight. Households and businesses need access to safe and reliable banking services as they make their financial decisions. While safety and fairness may seem distinct, they are interwoven. Financial instability disproportionately harms those who are economically vulnerable, so making the financial system safer is making it fairer, and unfair practices can make the financial system riskier, as we saw in the Global Financial Crisis. I look forward to pursuing both of these goals during my time as Vice Chair for Supervision. Accompanying my testimony today is theFederalReserve's Supervision and Regulation Reportdetailing the current state of the banking system from our supervisory and regulatory perspective. My testimony will offer you an overview of the banking system's current conditions and highlight efforts to monitor and mitigate vulnerabilities. I will also provide updates on a number of priority issues that the Federal Reserve is seeking to address. Current ConditionsReforms following the Global Financial Crisis have helped the United States maintain a resilient financial system for consumers, businesses, and communities. Capital and liquidity positions remain above regulatory requirements. The Federal Reserve's supervisory stress test, conducted earlier this year, showed that large banks had sufficient capital to maintain their lending to support the economy through the stressful conditions simulated by the stress test. But as I mentioned, we must ensure we are keeping pace. Many issues at the forefront of banking regulation today were not prominent five or ten years ago, and some of them scarcely even existed. For instance, few anticipated a global pandemic, even economists who used epidemiological approaches to model financial contagion. Further, the recent events in crypto markets, while mostly occurring outside the banking sector, have highlighted the risks to investors and consumers associated with new and novel asset classes and activities when not accompanied by strong guardrails. In addition, despite the data depicting a generally healthy U.S. banking system, the domestic economic outlook has weakened amid tighter financial conditions and increased uncertainty. A weaker economy could put stress on households and businesses and, thus, on the banking system as a whole. Uncertainty has led to increased financial market volatility and may also reveal pockets of excess leverage and liquidity risk in the non-bank financial sector, which risks spillovers to the banking system and the real economy. We saw a host of such risks with the disruptions in the United Kingdom's gilt markets. The Federal Reserve will be heightening its focus on liquidity, credit, and interest-rate risks as supervised institutions manage the changing financial conditions. In the wake of the pandemic, the global recovery is uneven, inflation is far too high, and geopolitical events pose downside risks to the U.S. and other economies around the world. Russia's war of aggression is devastating for the people of Ukraine, and is also disrupting commodities, energy, and food markets, and pushing up inflation around the world. And these factors—along with China's economic slowing, associated with its inward turn, pandemic shutdowns, and contraction in its real estate sector—are weighing on global economic growth. We remain attentive to these and other developments and are closely supervising our regulated institutions to assess potential risks and implications for the stability of the U.S. and global financial systems. Supervisory and Regulatory Priorities Capital ReviewTurning to a number of our priorities at the Federal Reserve, I am taking a holistic look at the Fed's capital framework to assess whether it is functioning as intended and supports a resilient financial system. Robust capital and liquidity requirements make it more likely that banks are able to absorb losses and continue their vital role supporting households and businesses. This is especially important for the largest and most complex banks, which pose the greatest risk to U.S. financial stability. We are taking a look at the G-SIB surcharge, the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio, stress testing, the countercyclical capital buffer, and other measures. Within this context, I am committed to working with my colleagues at the other federal bank regulatory agencies in implementing enhanced regulatory capital requirements known as the "Basel III endgame" standards.1 When considering improvements to the regulatory capital framework, I will be guided by a few key principles: the capital framework should be forward-looking, should be tiered so that the highest standards apply to the riskiest firms, and should support a safer and fairer financial system. We will look at design choices that help to further these goals. ResolutionIn recent years, merger activity and organic growth have increased the size of large banks, which could complicate efforts by regulators to resolve those firms upon failure without disruption to customers and counterparties. The Board recently invited comment on an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to enhance regulators' ability to resolve large banks in an orderly way, should they fail. We look forward to the comments we will receive. Merger ReviewThe Federal Reserve is also evaluating our approach to reviewing banks' proposed acquisitions. Mergers are often a feature of vibrant sectors, but the advantages that firms seek to gain through mergers must be weighed against the risks that mergers can pose to competition, consumers, and financial stability. A merged institution may be able to provide a wider range of products and services at lower prices. But if there is concentration, mergers could also reduce competition and access to financial services through higher prices or a reduced range of services. In addition, mergers of larger, more complex firms may pose risks to financial stability. We are also required to evaluate whether a merger would meet the convenience and needs of the community. The Federal Reserve—along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)—is reviewing the issues to see if any adjustments to our approach would be appropriate. Crypto ActivityAnother priority is monitoring the risk of crypto-asset-related activities. Over the last several years, we have seen crypto-asset activity grow rapidly and experience periods of significant stress. Some financial innovations offer opportunities, but as we have recently seen, many innovations also carry risks—which can include liquidity runs, the rapid collapse of asset values, misuse of customer funds, fraud, theft, manipulation, and money laundering. These risks, if not well controlled, can harm retail investors and cut against the goals of a safe and fair financial system. Most of this activity is occurring outside of the ambit of banking regulation. But recent events remind us of the potential for systemic risk if interlinkages develop between the crypto system that exists today and the traditional financial system. Crypto-asset-related activity, requires effective oversight that includes safeguards to ensure that crypto companies are subject to similar regulatory safeguards as other financial services providers. I would note with some humility that striking the right balance between creating an environment that supports innovation and managing related risks to businesses, households, and the stability of the financial system is no easy task. We do not want to stifle innovation, but when regulation is lax or behind the curve, it can facilitate risk taking and a race to the bottom that puts consumers, businesses, and the economy in danger and discredits new products and services with consumers and investors. I believe everyone has a stake in getting the regulatory balance right. We are working closely with the OCC and the FDIC to assess the risks and opportunities posed by a range of crypto-asset-related activities, and to clarify which activities are legally permissible and can be conducted by banks in a manner that is consistent with safety and soundness, consumer protection, and overall stability of the financial system. Before leaving the topic of crypto-assets, I would like to touch on stablecoins. Stablecoins, which like other instruments that purport to be available on demand at par value, can be subject to destabilizing runs and require strong federal prudential oversight to mitigate their potential for economic harm. That is especially the case for stablecoins that aim to function as private money. Legislative action on crypto-assets in general, and stablecoins in particular, would help promote responsible innovation and protect the financial system. Climate-Related Financial RisksWe are also working to understand financial risks related to climate change. At the Federal Reserve, our mandate in this area is important, but narrow, and we are focused on our supervisory responsibilities and our role in promoting a safe and stable financial system. To that end, the Federal Reserve recently announced a pilot climate scenario analysis exercise designed to enhance the ability of supervisors and firms to measure and manage climate-related financial risks. Scenario analysis—in which the resilience of financial institutions is assessed under different hypothetical climate scenarios—is an emerging tool to assess climate-related financial risks. The pilot climate scenario analysis exercise, which is distinct and separate from bank stress tests, will be exploratory in nature and not have capital consequences. It is also our intention to work with the OCC and the FDIC to provide guidance to large banks on how we expect them to identify, measure, monitor, and manage the financial risks of climate change. Operational ResilienceThe last priority I will mention is operational resilience. Financial institutions face significant challenges from a wide range of disruptive events. These include technology-based failures, cyber incidents, pandemics, and natural disasters. Such events, combined with banks' growing reliance on third-party service providers, expose them to a range of operational risks, which are often difficult to anticipate. When they manifest, these risks can affect the safety and soundness of affected banks and pose risks to U.S. financial stability by limiting market functioning or undermining trust in the system. We at the Federal Reserve will continue to work in this area to help ensure that banks understand and manage these complex and evolving challenges and that consumers remain protected. Additionally, we are committed to working closely with other domestic agencies and international authorities to coordinate on supervisory approaches to operational resilience. ConclusionAs the banking system continues to evolve, we must ensure that supervision and regulation keeps up with those changes and are appropriate for the underlying risks. Over the coming months and years, it will be crucial to examine new risks to the banking system and whether and how the real economy, including consumer needs and access to financial services, may change. As vulnerabilities appear, a strong banking system will help households and businesses weather those challenges. As Vice Chair for Supervision, I will continue to work to promote a safe and fair banking system. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1.https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20220909a.htm.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Barr submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives on November 16, 2022. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Earlier this year, I was honored to be sworn in as the Board's Vice Chair for Supervision. In this role, my priority is to make the banking system safer and fairer. That requires active and careful analysis of risks. The banking system is constantly evolving, so regulation and supervision must also adjust to respond to new and emerging risks. I am also committed to making the financial system fairer, which is fundamental to financial oversight. Households and businesses need access to safe and reliable banking services as they make their financial decisions. While safety and fairness may seem distinct, they are interwoven. Financial instability disproportionately harms those who are economically vulnerable, so making the financial system safer is making it fairer, and unfair practices can make the financial system riskier, as we saw in the Global Financial Crisis. I look forward to pursuing both of these goals during my time as Vice Chair for Supervision. Accompanying my testimony today is theFederalReserve's Supervision and Regulation Reportdetailing the current state of the banking system from our supervisory and regulatory perspective. My testimony will offer you an overview of the banking system's current conditions and highlight efforts to monitor and mitigate vulnerabilities. I will also provide updates on a number of priority issues that the Federal Reserve is seeking to address. Current ConditionsReforms following the Global Financial Crisis have helped the United States maintain a resilient financial system for consumers, businesses, and communities. Capital and liquidity positions remain above regulatory requirements. The Federal Reserve's supervisory stress test, conducted earlier this year, showed that large banks had sufficient capital to maintain their lending to support the economy through the stressful conditions simulated by the stress test. But as I mentioned, we must ensure we are keeping pace. Many issues at the forefront of banking regulation today were not prominent five or ten years ago, and some of them scarcely even existed. For instance, few anticipated a global pandemic, even economists who used epidemiological approaches to model financial contagion. Further, the recent events in crypto markets, while mostly occurring outside the banking sector, have highlighted the risks to investors and consumers associated with new and novel asset classes and activities when not accompanied by strong guardrails. In addition, despite the data depicting a generally healthy U.S. banking system, the domestic economic outlook has weakened amid tighter financial conditions and increased uncertainty. A weaker economy could put stress on households and businesses and, thus, on the banking system as a whole. Uncertainty has led to increased financial market volatility and may also reveal pockets of excess leverage and liquidity risk in the non-bank financial sector, which risks spillovers to the banking system and the real economy. We saw a host of such risks with the disruptions in the United Kingdom's gilt markets. The Federal Reserve will be heightening its focus on liquidity, credit, and interest-rate risks as supervised institutions manage the changing financial conditions. In the wake of the pandemic, the global recovery is uneven, inflation is far too high, and geopolitical events pose downside risks to the U.S. and other economies around the world. Russia's war of aggression is devastating for the people of Ukraine, and is also disrupting commodities, energy, and food markets, and pushing up inflation around the world. And these factors—along with China's economic slowing, associated with its inward turn, pandemic shutdowns, and contraction in its real estate sector—are weighing on global economic growth. We remain attentive to these and other developments and are closely supervising our regulated institutions to assess potential risks and implications for the stability of the U.S. and global financial systems. Supervisory and Regulatory Priorities Capital ReviewTurning to a number of our priorities at the Federal Reserve, I am taking a holistic look at the Fed's capital framework to assess whether it is functioning as intended and supports a resilient financial system. Robust capital and liquidity requirements make it more likely that banks are able to absorb losses and continue their vital role supporting households and businesses. This is especially important for the largest and most complex banks, which pose the greatest risk to U.S. financial stability. We are taking a look at the G-SIB surcharge, the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio, stress testing, the countercyclical capital buffer, and other measures. Within this context, I am committed to working with my colleagues at the other federal bank regulatory agencies in implementing enhanced regulatory capital requirements known as the "Basel III endgame" standards.1 When considering improvements to the regulatory capital framework, I will be guided by a few key principles: the capital framework should be forward-looking, should be tiered so that the highest standards apply to the riskiest firms, and should support a safer and fairer financial system. We will look at design choices that help to further these goals. ResolutionIn recent years, merger activity and organic growth have increased the size of large banks, which could complicate efforts by regulators to resolve those firms upon failure without disruption to customers and counterparties. The Board recently invited comment on an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to enhance regulators' ability to resolve large banks in an orderly way, should they fail. We look forward to the comments we will receive. Merger ReviewThe Federal Reserve is also evaluating our approach to reviewing banks' proposed acquisitions. Mergers are often a feature of vibrant sectors, but the advantages that firms seek to gain through mergers must be weighed against the risks that mergers can pose to competition, consumers, and financial stability. A merged institution may be able to provide a wider range of products and services at lower prices. But if there is concentration, mergers could also reduce competition and access to financial services through higher prices or a reduced range of services. In addition, mergers of larger, more complex firms may pose risks to financial stability. We are also required to evaluate whether a merger would meet the convenience and needs of the community. The Federal Reserve—along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)—is reviewing the issues to see if any adjustments to our approach would be appropriate. Crypto ActivityAnother priority is monitoring the risk of crypto-asset-related activities. Over the last several years, we have seen crypto-asset activity grow rapidly and experience periods of significant stress. Some financial innovations offer opportunities, but as we have recently seen, many innovations also carry risks—which can include liquidity runs, the rapid collapse of asset values, misuse of customer funds, fraud, theft, manipulation, and money laundering. These risks, if not well controlled, can harm retail investors and cut against the goals of a safe and fair financial system. Most of this activity is occurring outside of the ambit of banking regulation. But recent events remind us of the potential for systemic risk if interlinkages develop between the crypto system that exists today and the traditional financial system. Crypto-asset-related activity, requires effective oversight that includes safeguards to ensure that crypto companies are subject to similar regulatory safeguards as other financial services providers. I would note with some humility that striking the right balance between creating an environment that supports innovation and managing related risks to businesses, households, and the stability of the financial system is no easy task. We do not want to stifle innovation, but when regulation is lax or behind the curve, it can facilitate risk taking and a race to the bottom that puts consumers, businesses, and the economy in danger and discredits new products and services with consumers and investors. I believe everyone has a stake in getting the regulatory balance right. We are working closely with the OCC and the FDIC to assess the risks and opportunities posed by a range of crypto-asset-related activities, and to clarify which activities are legally permissible and can be conducted by banks in a manner that is consistent with safety and soundness, consumer protection, and overall stability of the financial system. Before leaving the topic of crypto-assets, I would like to touch on stablecoins. Stablecoins, which like other instruments that purport to be available on demand at par value, can be subject to destabilizing runs and require strong federal prudential oversight to mitigate their potential for economic harm. That is especially the case for stablecoins that aim to function as private money. Legislative action on crypto-assets in general, and stablecoins in particular, would help promote responsible innovation and protect the financial system. Climate-Related Financial RisksWe are also working to understand financial risks related to climate change. At the Federal Reserve, our mandate in this area is important, but narrow, and we are focused on our supervisory responsibilities and our role in promoting a safe and stable financial system. To that end, the Federal Reserve recently announced a pilot climate scenario analysis exercise designed to enhance the ability of supervisors and firms to measure and manage climate-related financial risks. Scenario analysis—in which the resilience of financial institutions is assessed under different hypothetical climate scenarios—is an emerging tool to assess climate-related financial risks. The pilot climate scenario analysis exercise, which is distinct and separate from bank stress tests, will be exploratory in nature and not have capital consequences. It is also our intention to work with the OCC and the FDIC to provide guidance to large banks on how we expect them to identify, measure, monitor, and manage the financial risks of climate change. Operational ResilienceThe last priority I will mention is operational resilience. Financial institutions face significant challenges from a wide range of disruptive events. These include technology-based failures, cyber incidents, pandemics, and natural disasters. Such events, combined with banks' growing reliance on third-party service providers, expose them to a range of operational risks, which are often difficult to anticipate. When they manifest, these risks can affect the safety and soundness of affected banks and pose risks to U.S. financial stability by limiting market functioning or undermining trust in the system. We at the Federal Reserve will continue to work in this area to help ensure that banks understand and manage these complex and evolving challenges and that consumers remain protected. Additionally, we are committed to working closely with other domestic agencies and international authorities to coordinate on supervisory approaches to operational resilience. ConclusionAs the banking system continues to evolve, we must ensure that supervision and regulation keeps up with those changes and are appropriate for the underlying risks. Over the coming months and years, it will be crucial to examine new risks to the banking system and whether and how the real economy, including consumer needs and access to financial services, may change. As vulnerabilities appear, a strong banking system will help households and businesses weather those challenges. As Vice Chair for Supervision, I will continue to work to promote a safe and fair banking system. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1.https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20220909a.htm.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the 59th Annual Economic Forecast Luncheon, Phoenix, Arizona Thank you, Dean Kadan, and thank you for the opportunity to speak today about the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for the Federal Reserve's ongoing fight to reduce inflation. I will begin with some comments on the overall outlook for economic growth and then try to explain how tighter monetary policy this year is intended to dampen demand and put downward pressure on inflation. One way is by influencing the labor market, so next I will give an update about labor market conditions and how I expect them to evolve. I'll then turn to the outlook for inflation, where we saw moderation in some measures in October, but to a level that remains unacceptably high. I'll finish up with how I expect monetary policy will evolve in the coming months to reduce inflation and return it to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent goal. Economic growth in the United States has slowed significantly in 2022, and I expect that slow growth to continue into next year. After shrinking slightly in the first half of this year, real gross domestic product rebounded in the third quarter to a 2.6 percent annual growth rate. But all indications are that this was a temporary boost, and that weak growth has returned in the last quarter of this year and will persist into 2023. Consumer and business spending has softened, amid deteriorating business sentiment in most sectors of the economy and near-record-low readings on surveys of consumer attitudes about the economy. There is no secret about why—inflation is very high, something people are reminded of every day when they see the prices of things they buy go up. On top of that, higher interest rates are raising borrowing costs for businesses and households. At any other time, I would be pretty unhappy about slowing growth, but not now. If you believe, as I do, that supply bottlenecks in the economy have mostly abated and that elevated inflation is primarily a function of high demand, then slowing down economic growth is absolutely necessary to bring inflation down to our 2 percent target. This slowing in activity is a sign that actions taken by the Federal Reserve this year to reduce inflation are working. Let me take a few minutes to explain how. The Federal Reserve tightens monetary policy to reduce inflation primarily by raising short-term interest rates, which has the effect of boosting interest rates throughout the economy. Higher borrowing costs curtail spending and investment by households and businesses. Since the FOMC pivoted in late 2021 in response to upwardly revised labor data and higher than anticipated inflation data, rates for 30-year fixed-rate home mortgages are up from around 3 percent to 7 percent today. Rates for triple-B corporate bonds have roughly doubled in 2022, and rates on higher yield debt have increased even more. As a result, there is a slowdown in the volume of financing in most markets, with some effect on various prices. The sector that has seen the most significant slowing is housing. New home construction and new and existing home sales, which grew strongly before and during the pandemic, have all fallen in 2022. As purchases of homes fall, so does demand for goods that typically accompany purchases—new carpeting, new furniture, new lawn mowers and so on. So slowing home sales will decrease demand for goods that complement the purchase of a new home and that will put downward pressure on the prices of those goods. Furthermore, housing prices that were increasing at an annual rate of 20 percent as late as May slowed to about a 2 percent rate in October, according to data from Zillow. Housing may be the first but won't be the last sector of the economy where higher interest rates will have the effect of dampening demand and will ultimately help moderate price increases. Our goal is to rein in demand, bringing demand and supply into better balance, which will help reduce upward pressure on inflation. One sector where improving this balance will be crucial is the labor market. Even as economic output has slowed, the labor market remains very tight. While there was roughly one job vacancy for every job seeker in what was a strong labor market before the pandemic, now there are almost two jobs for every person looking for work. Wages have been rising more quickly than they have in decades, much faster than productivity growth plus 2 percentage points that I think of as consistent with the FOMC's 2 percent inflation objective. But I do see tentative signs of some cooling in the labor market, which is vital to keep rising labor costs from putting upward pressure on inflation. The employment report published November 4 showed that payrolls grew by 261,000 in October. This increase, while large, was a step down from the pace earlier this year, when payrolls grew an average of 539,000 per month in the first quarter, 340,000 per month in the second quarter and 381,000 per month in the third quarter. At the same time, we also saw the unemployment rate tick up to 3.7 percent, though still close to its more than 50-year low. Other labor market data are also showing evidence of slight cooling. Various surveys of job vacancies are down from their peaks reached in March but are still historically very high. There have been some tech layoffs, which had been one of the fastest growing parts of the economy, but so far not in other sectors. And quits—which are mainly workers switching jobs for higher pay—are also down from their peak late last year. These tentative signs of cooling are mixed with many stories of continued labor market tightness. Business contacts tell me of empty offices and idle production capacity because employers cannot find workers. Retailers who hire seasonal workers say they will try to hold onto these employees after the holidays to fill future vacancies from attrition. And that is even with some expectation of slower sales growth in the next couple quarters. That said, we are starting to see some tentative signs of a moderation in wage growth. The 12-month increase in average hourly earnings continued to slow in October and the 3-month change continued to run lower than the 12-month rate, a promising signal of ongoing moderation. Wage growth has been a contributing factor to inflation, especially in the service sector, so it is important to get the labor market into better balance to bring future wage growth down to a more sustainable level that will assist in moving overall inflation lower. Let me now turn to the outlook for inflation. Last week's consumer price index (CPI) report was a very welcome moderation in the pace of increasing prices. Headline inflation rose 0.4 percent from September to October, the same pace as the month before, and was up 7.7 percent over the previous 12 months, down from 8.2 percent in September and 9.1 percent as recently as June. Core CPI, which excludes food and energy prices, increased 0.3 percent in October from September, a marked step-down from the 0.6 percent readings in the previous two months and the average of 0.5 percent over the first nine months of 2022. On a twelve-month change, core inflation came in at about 6.3 percent, down from 6.6 percent the previous month. The step down in October was widespread, involving both a deceleration in services prices and the first decline in core goods prices since March. Though welcome news, we must be cautious about reading too much into one inflation report. I don't know how sustained this deceleration in consumer prices will be. But, as a snapshot, the 0.3 percent increase in core CPI inflation in October from September, (actually 0.27 percent rounded up) works out to an annualized rate of about 3.25 percent. I focus on core over headline inflation because I believe it is a better indication of future inflation. This increase is much improved from the past several months but still very far from our 2 percent target. Looking at the categories that make up the CPI, we see that about half still have inflation over 3 percent. And, if you weight the categories by their contributions to the CPI, over 70 percent of the CPI basket continues to see inflation above 3 percent. I cannot emphasize enough that one report does not make a trend. It is way too early to conclude that inflation is headed sustainably down. In 2021, monthly core CPI inflation fell during the summer—it fell from 0.9 percent in April 2021 to 0.2 percent in August 2021 before accelerating back to 0.6 percent and 0.5 percent in October and November of that year. More recently, monthly core CPI inflation fell from 0.7 percent in June 2022 to 0.3 percent in July, only to rebound to 0.6 percent the next two months. We've seen this movie before, so it is too early to know if it will have a different ending this time. Inflation remains too high relative to the FOMC's target, and I thought it would be helpful to offer some detail of what I will be looking at to see continuing improvement in the inflation outlook. One area is goods inflation, where there was a widespread deceleration across durables and nondurables in October. With drops in core import prices and processed materials excluding food and energy over the past few months, I'm looking for continued downward pressure on core goods prices going forward. Housing, which is a large share of expenses for households, is another sector I will be watching closely in the months ahead as an indicator of the direction of overall inflation. As I discussed in a recent speech, escalating rents have played a large role in driving up inflation this year, and because turnover of leases occurs only periodically, I expect measures of rents and the equivalent for homeowners will continue to increase significantly for at least several more months.1But I will be watching for signs of moderation. Finally, I will be looking for a slowing in price increases in non-housing services, which have been quite robust in recent months and running at about twice their pre-pandemic level. As I said a moment ago, the inflation outlook for this sector will partly depend on the growth of wages. I will be looking closely for continued slowing in wage growth back to a more sustainable rate. Given that medium- and longer-term inflation expectations remain stable, an indication that investors and consumers retain confidence in the Fed's commitment and ability to achieve its inflation goal, I believe we can expect wage growth to slow. So, the recent CPI report is a positive development, but I'll need to see further progress. Like many others, I hope this report is the beginning of a meaningful and persistent decline in inflation. But policymakers cannot act based on hope. I will not be head-faked by one report and will continue to watch the data between now and the December FOMC meeting before deciding on the next step for policy. Now let me turn to the implications of this outlook for monetary policy. Since my last outlook speech in October, we have gotten some additional data that reinforces my sense that the labor market may be loosening, and that inflation pressure may be easing. But as I said a moment ago, this hasn't been sufficient to significantly alter my outlook or my view of appropriate monetary policy. Achieving the FOMC's dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability is still a one-sided campaign. With the labor market still strong and extremely tight, the Committee does not face a trade-off between employment and inflation. Inflation has been running significantly above our objective for more than a year, so monetary policy can and must be used aggressively to reduce it. To pursue that goal, the Federal Reserve has been aggressive. In nine months, we have raised the target range for the federal funds rate from near zero to 3-3/4 to 4 percent, a historically rapid pace of increases. In addition to that, the Fed is continuing to reduce its balance sheet each month by allowing the runoff of maturing securities, which supports the tightening of financial conditions. Despite these actions, I believe that policy is barely in restrictive territory today, so more interest rate hikes are needed to get inflation down. In the FOMC's November statement, the Committee added two new sentences on its view of the future path of policy, elaborating on our "reaction function," which is the basis for those future decisions.2Let me explain how I view this new language. The first new sentence is about "where we are going," which is the level of interest rates at which it will be appropriate to stop hiking. If asked what that sentence means, I would say that, with the current strength and outlook for the labor market, my decision for the "terminal rate" for policy will focus on progress toward our inflation goal. So, assuming the labor market and financial stability remain in check, the endpoint of the tightening path is highly dependent on the evolution of the inflation data. The second new sentence in the statement is about "how" we will get to the terminal rate—that is, the pace of rate increases to arrive at that destination. The FOMC language notes the pace will depend on several factors. The first is "the cumulative tightening of monetary policy." I have noted how significant and aggressive this tightening has been. We have gone from a low interest rate economy to one with fairly significant interest rates (although in historical terms, rates are still not that high for a tightening cycle). There is a tendency for Fed watchers to view each meeting's policy decision as solely determined by what has happened in the preceding six weeks. For me, this new sentence is an important reminder that each decision we make in the coming months will be heavily influenced by the significant, cumulative effect of the decisions we made earlier this year. Another factor listed by the Committee was "the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation." In my view, the Committee will reach the terminal rate well before inflation reaches 2 percent because of the abundance of evidence that it takes months, and perhaps even longer, for the full effects of a rate increase to work through the economy. Considering the cumulative effect of tightening and the likely lags for policy doesn't mean these factors are more important than new information about the economy. On the contrary, new data, especially on inflation, are much more important now, well into the tightening cycle, than when the only direction for the federal funds rate to go was up— and up by a lot. I am going to take a considerable risk here and employ an airplane simile to illustrate how I think of our past policy actions and where we are going. When an airplane is taking off, the pilot fires the engines as much as possible to get off the ground. The goal is to get to cruising altitude quickly, so the initial ascent is steep. But as the plane gets closer to cruising altitude, the pilot slows the rate of ascent, while continuing to climb. The final cruising altitude will depend on many factors, most notably details about the weather. Turbulence may force you to a higher or lower altitude, but you adjust as you go to have a smooth ride. This is similar to our policy actions this year. When the Fed was faced with rapidly escalating inflation and a strong labor market, it lifted rates aggressively off the effective lower bound including several 75-basis-point steps. But as the policy rate gets higher, the stronger is the case for slowing the rate of ascent while continuing to climb. This would correspond to slowing to 50-basis-point hikes. At a certain point, policy will reach an optimal cruising altitude, but we don't know exactly what that level will be because it depends on the data. Maybe new data will point to a shallower climb and a lower cruising altitude, which would suggest stepping down to 25-basis point hikes. Or maybe it could be necessary to continue climbing a little longer to a higher final attitude by implementing a sequence of 50 basis point hikes. In the end, the higher we raise the policy rate, the more pressing it is to think about the terminal rate and how policy should be adjusted to get there, but that will depend on the incoming data. Looking toward the FOMC's December meeting, the data of the past few weeks have made me more comfortable considering stepping down to a 50-basis-point hike. But I won't be making a judgement about that until I see more data, including the next PCE inflation report and the next jobs report. If the FOMC were to step down to a 50-basis-point increase, it is important to remember that this would still be a very significant tightening action—in other words, just pulling back on the rate of ascent a little bit. At this angle of ascent, with policy already in restrictive territory, the federal funds rate can still be increased quite rapidly with several 50-basis-point increases, a pretty aggressive path for policy. So, although I believe we are seeing some progress in the economy to dampen demand that will help moderate inflation, we have not yet made enough progress. As I have said recently, I expect that getting inflation to fall meaningfully and persistently toward our 2 percent target will require increases in the federal funds rate into next year. We still have a ways to go. Until then, I support continued rate increases and ongoing reductions in the Fed's balance sheet to restrain aggregate demand. When we reach our terminal rate, how long we stay at that level will largely be driven by our progress in bringing down inflation. 1. See Christopher J. Waller (2022), "The Economic Outlook with a Look at the Housing Market," speech delivered at the Mark C. Berger Workshop Series, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, October 6.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement (PDF)," press release, November 2.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Detroit Economic Club, Detroit, Michigan Good morning. It is a pleasure to be back in Michigan, although I wish I had been here to participate in the Turkey Trot last week, which is an annual tradition for my family and me. It is especially a treat to be back in Detroit, with its rich history of music, art, architecture, and industrial innovation—which I will address today. I am also delighted to see some familiar faces. Today, I would like to discuss the economic outlook and focus on one particularly important aspect of the economy: productivity. I have spent much of my career researching the ways in which American ingenuity and invention can be wellsprings of economic growth. I am here, therefore, to address the impressive innovation happening in the auto industry and what it tells us about future prospects for productivity in the U.S. manufacturing sector and in the economy more generally. I can think of no better place to do that than in the Motor City. OutlookTo set the stage, I will first turn to the U.S. economy as a whole, where inflation remains much too high. As a result, the Federal Reserve must continue to focus on bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent target. We have begun to see some improvement in the inflation data. The October report on consumer prices was encouraging, particularly the slowing in core inflation—the measure that excludes more volatile categories, such as food and energy. Producer price inflation also moderated in October, suggesting that inflation pressures on businesses may be easing. Nonetheless, I would be cautious about reading too much into one month of relatively favorable data. Core goods inflation has finally begun to slow significantly, helped by some long-anticipated improvement in global supply chains. Declines in wholesale prices for used cars and in prices for key manufacturing components, like plastic resin and steel, also suggest continued moderation in goods price inflation. Services, however, make up about two-thirds of consumer spending, and inflation in that sector has not yet slowed. Notably, inflation in housing costs shot up this year and will likely contribute substantially to overall inflation for some time. Nonetheless, some good news is emerging on this front. Rent increases on new leases have slowed in recent months. And a substantial number of multifamily units currently under construction will be delivered next year, helping to ease the housing shortage. Still, these positive developments are likely to feed into measured consumer prices only gradually. Services prices more broadly have accelerated sharply this year and may prove to be a persistent factor keeping inflation elevated. Demand for services continues to recover from its pandemic lows, with the release of pent-up demand for travel evident to anyone who has spent much time in DTW and other airports recently. Labor compensation is a key factor for non-housing services prices, and growth in labor costs remains well above pre-pandemic rates. There has been some moderation recently, with slowing in average hourly earnings and in the employment cost index. But wage growth remains above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation, given prevailing trends in productivity growth. ProductivityIn Michigan and the other parts of the country that boast manufacturing hubs, we all understand the importance of productivity. Productivity growth is a key factor in the health of the overall economy and in the daily lives of all Americans. Because ultimately, it drives rising standards of living for all of us. Growth in labor productivity, or output per hour worked, has been lackluster in the U.S. economy and around the world in recent years.1Some observers fret that we are running out of innovative ideas to squeeze more outputs from the same inputs.2Others look around and see amazing technology used in cutting-edge factories, warehouses, and stores and wonder if the innovation is happening but not spreading as fast as it once did. Whatever the cause, in recent years output per hour has only increased at half the rate it did as recently as the mid-2000s. This is cause for concern. Over the first three quarters of 2022, productivity in the business sector has recorded a disappointing decline of 3-3/4 percent at an annual rate. Payroll employment in the private sector has continued to increase, yet gross domestic product (GDP) has done little more than move sideways, resulting in an outright decline in labor productivity. However, the recent decline in productivity is partly an artifact of the pandemic. In 2020 and 2021, productivity soared when firms found ways to keep producing while many employees were away from the workplace (figure 1). Meanwhile, the economy shifted away from services—a lower-productivity sector—and toward goods—a higher-productivity sector—as households substituted new televisions for dining out and family vacations. As a result, average productivity moved up. These temporary changes have largely reversed, leading to the recent declines in productivity, pushing it back toward its pre-pandemic trend. The tight labor market has played a role, as well. With 1.8 job openings for every job seeker, firms may be using the GDP slowdown as an opportunity to let their hiring catch up to the earlier surge in labor demand. Some firms may even be operating with a larger workforce than necessary in order to hold on to talent they may not have retained in normal times. In any event, we should avoid making too much of quarterly swings in choppy data but focus instead on the trend over several years. Taking this longer view, what pace of productivity growth should we expect going forward? This question is critical to policymakers, as inflation is tied to productivity. When firms see rising output per hour, they have room to keep prices low. For consumer goods, this can help lower inflation. For material inputs, this lowers the cost of downstream production. And for equipment, lower prices mean more capital investment, a knock-on effect that boosts productivity further. If there is a productivity revival, it will likely involve manufacturing, if history is our guide. When it comes to productivity, the sector has a record of punching above its weight. Since the mid-20th century, manufacturing productivity has risen a full percentage point faster than productivity for the broader economy (figure 2). The sector seems to find ways to do more with less. For example, manufacturing lost a staggering 5 million workers from 2000 to 2019, nearly 40 percent of its workforce. As seen in Michigan, this meant difficult transitions for industrial workers and their families as the economy shifted toward services and substituted imports for domestic production. Yet, at the same time, output as measured by the Federal Reserve's industrial production index continued to climb. Since the mid-2010s, though, this relationship has reversed, and manufacturing productivity has been noticeably lower than that of the overall economy. What explains the anemic growth in recent years? For one thing, IT equipment manufacturing has moved offshore, taking the productivity gains from progressively smaller and faster computer chips with it.3More generally, offshore locations have focused on production of high-volume goods. Many of the remaining U.S. plants produce more specialized products, which tend to require more specialized labor and have lower productivity growth.4 The motor vehicle industry has mostly defied this trend of offshoring final production. The U.S. motor vehicle industry still produces more than 10 million vehicles a year and employs 1 million people at assembly plants, labs, and suppliers. Furthermore, it is an extremely innovative industry, and fierce competition forces automakers to roll out innovations quickly. Dozens of motor vehicle research and development labs reside in Michigan alone, churning out ideas for vehicle safety, fuel efficiency, comfort, and style. And with each passing year, cars and trucks look more like computers on wheels. Looking around Michigan today, I see all kinds of changes. Some changes are to the production process, like the newest generation of robots. These communicate at lightning speed, using the same high-speed "5G" technology as the latest phones; utilize artificial intelligence to adapt to their environment; and operate safely right next to workers on the assembly line. Some changes are to design, like collision avoidance systems, sophisticated navigation apps, and the dozens of electric vehicles now on the road or coming to market soon. Some observers look at these changes with trepidation. Robot orders surged after the onset of the pandemic and have continued apace, a partial solution to the critical shortage of labor in manufacturing.5What does all this mean for production line workers? Motor vehicle manufacturers have been the most intensive users of robots for decades. The first assembly line robot was rolled out in 1961 by General Motors in Trenton, New Jersey. Yet, the motor vehicle industry still employs more than 1 million workers, and its share of manufacturing employment has been going up since 2010. How did that happen? Research has shown that workers are not just suited for a single job—they have a bundle of broadly applicable skills. When robots take over one task, workers are shifted to another task and, in turn, new tasks appear.6The set of tasks to perform is not fixed, a belief economists call the "lump of labor fallacy." Rather, we need production workers to work with the new equipment and to focus on the problem-solving that robots do not do well. That means that the next generation of plant workers will use touch screens a lot more and rivet guns a lot less. And the systems they install as they assemble the vehicles are more laden with electronics with each passing year. Many are anticipating the arrival of the self-driving car, but in some respects, it is already here. Vehicles can parallel park themselves with the touch of a button, stop you from drifting out of your lane, and follow the car ahead of you, keeping a safe distance. While the U.S. is not making as many semiconductor chips anymore, we are using a lot of them. If that was not apparent already, we learned that lesson the hard way during the pandemic. I understand that, even now, thousands of vehicles are all but built, parked while they await missing chips. The increasing share of electronic content in vehicles contributes to that delay, as does the shift toward electric vehicles, which may have two or three times the chip content of an internal combustion vehicle. The shortfalls in supply and corresponding price pressures have eased somewhat, but they have not disappeared. Highly innovative companies in the motor vehicle industry—as well as pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, and, of course, information technology—stand out as leaders in driving the quality of goods up and the cost of production down. Why isn't that showing up in productivity? For one thing, it takes time. History has shown that major innovations take years for their effects to be fully manifested. Firms have to reorganize production—including changing the layout of plants, rethinking management, and reshuffling workers—to maximize their talents.7Electrification of the manufacturing sector took decades as plants were redesigned and rebuilt to exploit the flexibility of getting away from steam power.8Likewise, we still have not seen the last of the changes that the IT revolution will bring. Productivity-enhancing ideas spread more quickly in more dynamic environments. When labor and capital move quickly toward their best uses—at the more productive firms—overall productivity accelerates. And when firms have close competitors on their heels, they may adopt new techniques faster.9Entrepreneurship plays an important role in this process. Sometimes, a new idea needs a new firm not committed to old ways of doing business. This kind of dynamism has diminished in recent years, though the surge in business creation in the past two years may be an encouraging sign.10 Indeed, the U.S. manufacturing sector is healthy. The recovery from the pandemic downturn has been remarkable, especially in comparison to the Great Recession. The sector is currently producing at 3 percent above its pre-pandemic level. And, importantly, October marked 18 consecutive months of increasing manufacturing employment. If manufacturing were to return to its role as a productivity leader, productivity for the total economy would grow noticeably faster. Looking ahead, productivity plays an important role in our thinking about the outlook. Productivity growth raises the nation's per capita income and, one hopes, the welfare of the typical household. As I mentioned earlier, productivity growth may also help lower prices. If we can make more with less, firms can lower the cost of the final product and still remain profitable. For this reason, it is heartening to see all the innovation happening in the motor vehicle industry and throughout the economy. It is hard to know exactly when all the benefits will show up, but we know the historical evidence suggests they are coming. Policy ImplicationsWhat does all this mean for monetary policy? Innovation and productivity growth undergird our long-term growth prospects, but they have only an indirect link to current inflation developments. More broadly, the auto sector and manufacturing overall serve as a microcosm to observe many factors buffeting the economy and impacting consumer prices, such as bottlenecks and labor shortages. Notwithstanding some easing of these pressures on goods prices, services prices continue to rise briskly. Altogether, inflation is still unacceptably high and must be our primary focus. The Federal Reserve has taken significant steps to rein in price increases. Since March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has raised its policy rate nearly 4 percentage points, an unusually rapid pace of increases that has significantly tightened financial conditions. That tightening is clearly slowing demand in sectors that are interest sensitive, especially housing, with residential investment contracting sharply. Consumer spending has remained resilient, however, supported by labor income growth and still-elevated savings. As we said in the most recent FOMC statement, we anticipate "ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time."11What policy rate is sufficiently restrictive we will only learn over time by watching how the economy evolves. Given the tightening already in the pipeline, I am mindful that monetary policy works with long lags. Thus, as we get closer to that uncertain destination, it would be prudent to move in smaller steps. How far we go, and how long we keep rates restrictive, will depend on observed progress in bringing down inflation. But rest assured, we will keep at it until the job is done. Thank you. 1. See Mehrdad Esfahani, John G. Fernald, and Bart Hobijn (2020), "World Productivity: 1996–2014," ASU Center for the Study of Economic Liberty Research Paper (Tempe, Ariz.: Arizona State University, March).Return to text 2. See Robert J. Gordon and Hassan Sayed (2019), "The Industry Anatomy of the Transatlantic Productivity Growth Slowdown," Working Paper 25703 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March); Nicholas Bloom, Charles L. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb (2020), "Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?"American Economic Review,vol. 110 (April), pp. 1104–44.Return to text 3. In 1975, Gordon Moore predicted that the number of transistors found on integrated circuits (semiconductors) would double every two years. The accuracy of this prediction, known as Moore's Law, is used as a barometer of the pace of technical advance in the electronics industry.Return to text 4. Mismeasurement could also be a contributor to the lackluster productivity gains in manufacturing. See Susan Houseman, Christopher Kurz, Paul Lengermann, and Benjamin Mandel (2011), "Offshoring Bias in U.S. Manufacturing,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 25 (Spring), pp. 111–32; David M. Byrne, John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), "Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-017 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March).Return to text 5. According to the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity, over 40 percent of manufacturers report difficulty hiring workers, triple the rate before the pandemic. The Association for Advancing Automation reports that as of 2022:Q3, orders were 50 percent higher than two years earlier.Return to text 6. See David H. Autor (2015), "Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and Future of Workplace Automation,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 29 (Summer), pp. 3–30; Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo (2020), "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from U.S. Labor Markets,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 128 (June), pp. 2188–244; Gilbert Cette, Aurélien Devillard, and Vincenzo Spiezia (2021), "The Contribution of Robots to Productivity Growth in 30 OECD Countries over 1975–2019,"Economics Letters,vol. 200 (March).Return to text 7. See Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (2021), "The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 13 (January), pp. 333–72.Return to text 8. See Paul A. David (1990), "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,"American Economic Review,vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61.Return to text 9. The relationship between competition and innovation is complicated and a matter of some debate. See Philippe Aghion, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt (2005), "Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 120 (May), pp. 701–28. In addition, see the discussion of the literature in Rachel Griffith and John Van Reenen (2021), "Product Market Competition, Creative Destruction and Innovation," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP16763 (Washington: Center for Economic and Policy Research, November).Return to text 10. See Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24.Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement (PDF)," press release, November 2.Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair Lael Brainard At the 21st BIS Annual Conference Central Banking after the Pandemic: Challenges Ahead, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland Policymakers and researchers have begun reassessing certain features of the economy and monetary policy in light of recent experience. After several decades in which supply was highly elastic and inflation was low and relatively stable, a series of supply shocks associated with the pandemic and Russia's war against Ukraine have contributed to high inflation, in combination with a very rapid recovery in demand. The experience with the pandemic and the war highlights the challenges for monetary policy in responding to a protracted series of adverse supply shocks. In addition, to the extent that the lower elasticity of supply we have seen recently could become more common due to challenges such as demographics, deglobalization, and climate change, it could herald a shift to an environment characterized by more volatile inflation compared with the preceding few decades.1 Inflation in the United States and many countries around the world is very high (figure 1). While both demand and supply are contributing to high inflation, it is the relative inelasticity of supply in key sectors that most clearly distinguishes the pandemic- and war-affected period of the past three years from the preceding 30 years of the Great Moderation.2Interestingly, inflation is broadly higher throughout much of the global economy, and even jurisdictions that began raising rates forcefully in 2021 have not stemmed the global inflationary tide.3 In the United States, as a result of significant fiscal and monetary support, the level of private domestic final purchases recovered extremely rapidly in 2020 and 2021 to levels consistent with the pre-pandemic trend before moving below trend in 2022 (figure 2). Although demand came in near the pre-pandemic trend on an aggregate level, the pandemic induced a shift in composition that concentrated large increases in demand in certain sectors where the supply response was constrained. The shift in consumption from services to goods was so pronounced that—despite plunging at the onset of the pandemic in March 2020—real spending on goods had already risen nearly 4 percent above its pre-pandemic trend by June of that year. While a very slow rotation back toward pre-pandemic patterns of consumption has been under way for over a year, it remains incomplete more than two and a half years after the initial shutdown: In the most recent data, the level of goods spending remains 6 percent above the level implied by its pre-pandemic trend, while services spending remains a little more than 2 percent below its pre-pandemic trend (figure 3). The supply shocks to goods, labor, and commodities have been accompanied by unusually high volatility in monthly inflation readings since the beginning of the pandemic. Since March 2020, the standard deviation of month-over-month core inflation has been 0.22 percentage point—a level of variation not seen in a 31-month period since the 1970s and more than double the standard deviation in monthly core inflation from 1990 to 2019. The initial drivers of this high variation in monthly core inflation readings were a sharp drop in prices and subsequent bounceback in the first months of the pandemic, followed by a couple of bursts lasting three to four months each. The first burst occurred around reopening in the spring of 2021, and the second occurred amid the effects of the Delta and Omicron COVID-19 variants in the autumn of 2021 (figure 4).4 The evidence suggests that high concentrations of demand in sectors such as appliances, housing, and motor vehicles—where supply was constrained by the effects of the pandemic—played an important role initially in generating inflationary pressures. Acute constraints on shipping and on the supply of nonsubstitutable intermediate inputs like semiconductors were compounded by acute constraints on labor supply associated with the effects of the Delta and Omicron variants and later compounded further by sharp commodities supply shocks associated with Russia's war on Ukraine. The standard monetary policy prescription is to "look through" supply shocks, such as commodities price shocks or shutdowns of ports or semiconductor plants, that are not assessed to leave a lasting imprint on potential output.5In contrast, if supply shocks durably lower potential output such that the economy is operating above potential, monetary policy tightening is necessary to bring demand into alignment with the economy's reduced productive capacity. Importantly, and separately from the implications for potential output, monetary policy should respond strongly if supply shocks risk de-anchoring inflation expectations.6 Although these tenets of monetary policy sound relatively straightforward in theory, they are challenging to assess and implement in practice. It is difficult to assess potential output and the output gap in real time, as has been extensively documented by research.7This is especially true in an environment of high uncertainty. The level of uncertainty around the output gap varies considerably over time, and research suggests that more muted policy reactions are warranted when uncertainty about the output gap is high.8The unexpectedly long-lasting global pandemic and the sharp disruptions to commodities associated with Russia's war against Ukraine have contributed to substantial uncertainty (figure 5). Even so, the drawn-out sequence of shocks to the supply of labor, commodities, and key intermediate inputs, such as semiconductors, blurred the lines about what constitutes a temporary shock as opposed to a persistent shock to potential output. Even when each individual supply shock fades over time and behaves like a temporary shock on its own, a drawn-out sequence of adverse supply shocks that has the cumulative effect of constraining potential output for an extended period is likely to call for monetary policy tightening to restore balance between demand and supply. In addition, a protracted series of supply shocks associated with an extended period of high inflation—as with the pandemic and the war—risks pushing the inflation expectations of households and businesses above levels consistent with the central bank's long-run inflation objective.9It is vital for monetary policy to keep inflation expectations anchored, because inflation expectations shape the behavior of households, businesses, and workers and enter directly into the inflation process. In the presence of a protracted series of supply shocks and high inflation, it is important for monetary policy to take a risk-management posture to avoid the risk of inflation expectations drifting above target. Even in the presence of pandemics and wars, central bankers have the responsibility to ensure that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored at levels consistent with our target. In monitoring inflation expectations for purposes of risk management, not only the median but also the distribution of inflation expectations can provide important information about how inflation expectations may be changing.10Survey measures suggest that the median of longer-term inflation has remained within pre-pandemic ranges consistent with 2 percent inflation (figure 6). However, starting in 2021, there has been a greater dispersion than usual of views about future inflation in survey responses, as shown in figure 6. Although initially the increased dispersion reflected a rise in expectations for significantly above-target inflation, more recently, following substantial cumulative monetary policy tightening, the increased dispersion has also reflected increased expectations of no inflation or even disinflation. About one-fourth of respondents to the most recent University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers anticipate that prices are likely to be the same or below their current level 5 to 10 years in the future—roughly three times the average fraction that reported such expectations before the pandemic. Finally, it is important to explore whether any features of the inelastic supply response associated with the pandemic and the war may have implications for potential growth and macroeconomic stability in the future.11In particular, despite the unprecedented pandemic policy support for businesses of all sizes that was directed at preserving the supply side of the economy, key sectors struggled to ramp up activity after reopening. The supply response was particularly impaired in sectors where supply chains are geographically fragmented and recurring foreign COVID-19 lockdowns have reduced the reliability of foreign supplies. While conditions have improved dramatically from some of the worst periods in 2021, measures like the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York indicate that total supply chain pressures still are elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels (figure 7). The supply disruptions in key goods and commodities sectors associated with the pandemic and Russia's war against Ukraine have highlighted the fragility of global supply chains and the risks of inelastic supply at moments of stress. Conditions have improved dramatically over the past year, judging by the return of the ISM Supplier Deliveries index to its pre-pandemic range of values (figure 8). That said, ongoing discussions about moving from "just in time" to "just in case" inventory management and from offshoring to "nearshoring" are raising important questions about the extent to which businesses are likely to reconfigure global supply chains based on a reassessment of the tradeoff between cost efficiency and supply resilience. Similarly, some have conjectured that the slow and incomplete recovery of the workforce over the course of the pandemic may be the beginning of a longer-term change in labor supply dynamics (figure 9).12In addition, the potential for more frequent and severe climate events, as we are already seeing, and for frictions in the energy transition could also lead to greater volatility of supply. Together, a combination of forces—the deglobalization of supply chains, the higher frequency and severity of climate disruptions, and demographic shifts—could lead to a period of lower supply elasticity and greater inflation volatility. To conclude, the experience with the pandemic and the war highlights challenges for monetary policy in responding to supply shocks. A protracted series of adverse supply shocks could persistently weigh on potential output or could risk pushing inflation expectations above target in ways that call for monetary policy to tighten for risk-management reasons. More speculatively, it is possible that longer-term changes—such as those associated with labor supply, deglobalization, and climate change—could reduce the elasticity of supply and increase inflation volatility into the future. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text and to Kenneth Eva for preparing the figures. This text updates the views that I discussed as part of a panel at the BIS Annual Meeting on June 24, 2022. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Research has generated a range of estimates on the contributions from supply and demand factors. For example, Shapiro (2022) finds that demand factors are responsible for about one-third of the surge in inflation above the pre-pandemic trend, while di Giovanni and others (2022) find a number closer to two-thirds. See Adam Shapiro (2022), "How Much Do Supply and Demand Drive Inflation?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2022-15 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June); and Julian di Giovanni, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alvaro Silva, and Muhammed Yildirim (2022), "Global Supply Chain Pressures, International Trade, and Inflation (PDF)," paper presented at the ECB Forum on Central Banking 2022, Sintra, Portugal, June 27–29.Return to text 3. The median year-to-date total policy rate hike within the group of Brazil, Hungary, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, and South Korea is 6 percentage points. All of these countries began forceful rate hikes in 2021, and the cumulative hikes have taken policy rates in some of these countries above 10 percent. Despite this, through September 2022 core inflation in these countries was 9.5 percent year-over-year, rising 3.5 percentage points since March. See Economist (2022), "Even Super-Tight Policy Is Not Bringing Down Inflation," October 28, https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/10/23/even-super-tight-policy-is-not-bringing-down-inflation.Return to text 4. Pandemic fiscal measures played an important role in boosting demand, but the rapid deceleration of inflation over the summer of 2021 and subsequent rebound in inflation from October through the end of the year do not line up well with the fiscal demand impulse projected by most forecasters. For example, the Brookings Institution projected a smooth demand impulse from the American Rescue Plan that peaked at the end of last year. See Wendy Edelberg and Louise Sheiner (2021), "The Macroeconomic Implications of Biden's $1.9 Trillion Fiscal Package," Brookings Institution,Up Front(blog), January 28.Return to text 5. See, for instance, Martin Bodenstein, Christopher J. Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2008), "Optimal Monetary Policy with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 55 (October), pp. S18–33, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304393208001050#!.Return to text 6. Ricardo Reis makes the case that both these factors would have prescribed tighter policy in the current environment.See Ricardo Reis (2022), "The Burst of High Inflation in 2021–22: How and Why Did We Get Here?" CEPR Discussion Paper Series DP17514 (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July).Return to text 7. See Athanasios Orphanides and Simon van Norden (2002), "The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 84 (November), pp. 569–83.Return to text 8. For discussions of the time-varying nature of output gap uncertainty, see Travis J. Berge (2020), "Time-Varying Uncertainty of the Federal Reserve's Output Gap Estimate," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-012 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February; revised April 2021); and Rochelle M. Edge and Jeremy B. Rudd (2016), "Real-Time Properties of the Federal Reserve's Output Gap,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 98 (October), pp. 785–91. For a discussion of tempering the policy response to the output gap in response to increased uncertainty, see Athanasios Orphanides (2003), "Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (April), pp. 605–31.Return to text 9. For two recent examples of assessing longer-term inflation expectations, see Michael T. Kiley (2022), "Anchored or Not: How Much Information Does 21st Century Data Contain on Inflation Dynamics?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-016 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March); and Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia, Francesca Loria, and David López-Salido (2022), "Is Trend Inflation at Risk of Becoming Unanchored? The Role of Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 31).Return to text 10. See, for example, Ricardo Reis (2021), "Losing the Inflation Anchor (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 307–61. The Board's staff recently updated the Index of Common Inflation Expectations to include the 25th and 75th percentiles of inflation expectations over the next 12 months from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers.Return to text 11. See, for example, Agustín Carstens (2022), "The Return of Inflation," speech delivered at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, April 5.Return to text 12. See, for example, Charles Goodhart and Manoj Pradhan (2020),The Great Demographic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning Inequality, and an Inflation Revival(Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan).Return to text Accessible Version