Bank regulatory agencies today requested comment on a proposal to increase the strength and resilience of the banking system. The proposal would modify large bank capital requirements to better reflect underlying risks and increase the consistency of how banks measure their risks. The changes would implement the final components of the Basel III agreement, also known as the Basel III endgame. Additionally, following the banking turmoil in March 2023, the proposal seeks to further strengthen the banking system by applying a broader set of capital requirements to more large banks. The proposal would generally apply to banks with $100 billion or more in total assets. Community banks would not be impacted by this proposal. In particular, the proposal would standardize aspects of the capital framework related to credit risk, market risk, operational risk, and financial derivative risk. Additionally, the proposal would require banks to include unrealized gains and losses from certain securities in their capital ratios. These banks would also be subject to the supplementary leverage ratio and the countercyclical capital buffer, if activated. The proposed improvements to strengthen the banking system are estimated to result in an aggregate 16 percent increase in common equity tier 1 capital requirements for affected bank holding companies, with the increase principally affecting the largest and most complex banks. The effects would vary for each bank based on its activities and risk profile. Most banks currently would have enough capital to meet the proposed requirements. The proposal includes transition provisions to give banks sufficient time to adapt to the changes while minimizing any potential adverse impact. During the comment period, the agencies will collect data to further refine their estimate of the proposal's impact. Under the proposal, large banks would begin transitioning to the new framework on July 1, 2025, with full compliance starting July 1, 2028. Separately, the Federal Reserve Board today also requested comment on a proposal that would make certain adjustments to the calculation of the capital surcharge for the largest and most complex banks. The changes would better align the surcharge to each bank's systemic risk profile, in particular by measuring a bank's systemic importance averaged over the entire year, instead of only at the year-end value. Comments on both proposals are due by November 30, 2023, which is more than 120 days for public comment. Board Memo (PDF) Fact Sheet (PDF) Overview (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Basel III endgame proposal Comments:Submit|View Federal Registernotice: GSIB surcharge proposal Comments:Submit|View Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman Statement by Governor Christopher J. Waller Open Board Meeting on July 27, 2023
Federal financial institution regulatory agencies today updated their existing guidance on liquidity risks and contingency planning. The updated guidance highlights that depository institutions should regularly evaluate and update their contingency funding plans. The updated guidance encourages depository institutions to incorporate the discount window as part of their contingency funding plans. Consistent with other contingency funding sources, the guidance reinforces the supervisory expectation that if the discount window is part of a depository institution's contingency funding plans, the depository institution should establish and maintain operational readiness to use the discount window, which includes conducting periodic transactions. The discount window can readily provide funding for depository institutions and the Central Liquidity Facility can do so for credit unions. The guidance applies to all depository institutions supervised by the agencies. Addendum to the Interagency Policy Statement on Funding and Liquidity Risk Management: Importance of Contingency Funding Plans (PDF)
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York Thank you. Whenever I get such a warm welcome, I always say to myself, "Waller, they really aren't here for you or your sparkling personality. They're here for your outlook."1Which is fine, because accurately communicating my economic outlook is an important part of my job. Tonight, in addition to providing new information about my outlook based on new data, I also want to clarify my views on how the economy has been operating over time and my view of appropriate monetary policy. Doing so can help the public anticipate how I will react to new developments, not just at the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), but further into the future. That's crucial, because monetary policy works mostly by influencing the public's view of financial and economic conditions well into the future, affecting spending and investment decisions. Whether I say so or not, every time I speak, I am trying to better explain how and why I make policy decisions. My plan is to cover three issues. First, by looking over the past few FOMC meetings, I want to describe how my outlook has been shaped by both economic data and uncertainty—what we have learned at each point and what we don't yet know about the economy. Second, I will discuss how I think about lags with which policy affects economic activity and inflation and the impact on the appropriate path of policy. And third, I will review the recent data and discuss how I see policy evolving over the remainder of this year. Recent Policy ActionsAt the June meeting, I supported keeping the policy rate unchanged. Based only on the economic data that was coming in showing a tight labor market and stubbornly high inflation, I believe that raising the policy rate 25 basis points was justified. However, I had lingering doubts about when or if an abrupt tightening of credit conditions would occur. I viewed the lingering effects of the banking stresses from March as a downside risk to cause a tightening of credit conditions. Although there did not appear to be a lot of evidence that a substantial credit crunch was in the works, I felt that waiting another six weeks was prudent risk management. In the end, I believed that risk management concerns slightly outweighed hiking based on the incoming data. I also felt more comfortable with this decision given that the median of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) signaled two additional rate hikes by the end of this year. Early in March, prior to the March FOMC meeting, I had planned to raise my terminal rate 50 basis points given the hot data that had come in at that point. But then came the turmoil in the banking sector. My thought was that credit conditions were going to tighten a lot as a result of the banking turmoil. I believed this tightening would effectively replace some of the tightening that otherwise would have been needed through monetary policy. The net result was that in the March SEP, I left my projection of the terminal policy rate unchanged from December. But by June, there was little evidence that credit conditions were tightening more than would be expected as a result of monetary policy that had already tightened significantly. This led me to believe policy needed to be tighter relative to what I thought in March. So, I marked up my projected path for the federal funds rate at the end of 2023 by 50 basis points. So why did I walk you through this evolution of my thinking of the appropriate setting of policy? First, it highlights how the appropriate setting for monetary policy shifts over time. Second, it shows that managing uncertainty and risks is a big part of my job. Third, I hope it allows you to better consider how policymakers will adjust the setting of policy in response to incoming data going forward. Monetary Policy LagsA second issue for the FOMC is how long it takes for changes in monetary policy to affect economic activity and inflation. As reported in the minutes of various FOMC meetings, the Committee often discusses these lags. There is a wide range of views among researchers and policymakers as to how long it takes for the full effect of monetary policy to register in the economy. What I would like to discuss is expectations for how long it will take for last year's sizable monetary policy tightening to show up in the economic data. While there is no consensus on an exact length of time, traditional rules of thumb say that the maximum effect of an unexpected policy change, what economists call a "shock," on the real economy is between 12 and 24 months. There is tremendous uncertainty around this estimate. Furthermore, commentary sometimes treats lagged effects as a "Wile E. Coyote" moment where nothing happens for a long time and then wham…off the cliff we go as the full force of past policy actions suddenly take effect. When considering applying this 12- to 24-month rule to last year's policy actions, we need to ask two questions: (1) When did the policy shock occur? (2) Does the size of the shock matter? What I want to do in the next few minutes is push back against the view that the bulk of the effects from last year's policy hikes have yet to hit the economy. Let me start by setting the stage with how the economic models that estimate these lags are developed. Some of this discussion may be a bit geeky, so bear with me. Economists typically use linear or log-linear statistical models that capture how past changes in a variable affect the current realization of that variable. The impact of past realizations of an economic variable on current values is estimated using constant coefficients. For example, if gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a 1 percent annual rate last quarter, a model might estimate that 0.9 of that increase will carry through to GDP in the current quarter and .8 of it will carry forward into the next quarter. These estimates of 0.9 and 0.8 are constant across time and are independent of how big the change is in GDP last quarter—if last quarter's GDP increased at a 2 percent rate, 0.9 of that would carry through to the current quarter and 0.8 of it would carry forward into the next quarter. In short, the speed at which past changes feed into current and future values does not change over time and does not depend on the size of past changes. Once these models are estimated using historical data, the policy exercise then is to feed an unexpected, temporary 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate into this system of linear equations and simulate the effects on key economic variables. The idea is to capture a causal response of the economy to the policy shock. Based on this process, we can trace out the change over time in a variable, say GDP. Economists call this an impulse response function. Typically, these impulse response functions illustrate how the variables move relative to their long-run values. The impulse response functions are normally hump-shaped—there is a small effect initially and the effect grows over time with the maximal impact occurring several quarters after the policy surprise. After the peak impact, the effect of the policy change on the real economy fades away, with the variables returning to their long run steady state values. The hump-shaped impulse response function illustrates that there are lagged effects from a policy surprise. There are a wide variety of statistical models one can use for this exercise but looking across these models, one gets the rule of thumb that the maximal effects of monetary policy changes will hit the economy with a 12-month to 24-month lag. There are two key takeaways from this discussion. First, the hump-shaped response means there are no "cliff effects"—a policy change is not associated with a long period of no effect that is then followed by an abrupt change in the variable. Second, economic variables respond sluggishly to unexpected policy changes and the sluggishness is what generates a lagged response to a policy action. There are many explanations as to why households and businesses respond sluggishly, such as adjustment costs, sticky prices and wages, nominal contracts, habit persistence in consumption, or the fact that there is an option value of waiting when deciding to invest. Given this basic description of how lags are estimated, let me now turn to my questions. First, when did the policy shock occur? In these statistical models, it occurs when there is an unexpected change in the federal funds rate. In short, from the point of view of the model, the FOMC wakes up one morning and surprises markets with a 25-basis point hike.2While this is a fun exercise to see what happens, it doesn't really capture how monetary policy works in practice. Only rarely do policymakers try to surprise markets, and in fact, we usually specify our policy intentions well ahead of time through the use of forward guidance. As I said earlier, forward guidance is one of the purposes of this speech. Forward guidance is used to signal future policy actions and, when it is credible, financial markets price those expected actions into today's interest rates. By instantly pricing in future policy, promised rate hikesimmediatelyaffect many of the costs of financing for households and firms, even though the actual policy rate hasn't moved. As a result, policy tightening occurs with theannouncementof policy tightening, not when the rate change actually happens. As an illustration, look at how the two-year Treasury yield moved between late 2021 and March 2022, a time when the FOMC was talking about lifting the policy target range above zero. I have argued in the past that the two-year Treasury yield is a good proxy for the stance of monetary policy and captures announcement effects.3The 2-year yield went from 25 basis points in September 2021 to around 200 basis points by the March 2022 FOMC meeting. Even though we had not raised the policy rate nor did we get the policy rate up to 200 basis points until August 2022, the markets priced in a nearly 200 basis point increase in the expected policy rate before we actually raised it. This forward guidance effectively shaved off about 6 months from the usual 12- to 24-month lag that one might conjecture would be needed to see the 200 basis points of actual tightening affect the economy.4That is, forward guidance shortens the lag time between when the policy rate changes and when the effects of actual policy tightening occur. Now let me turn to the second question, whether the size of the shock matters for estimating lags in policy. In the standard linear models used for these exercises, the size of the shock doesn't matter. The size of the shock basically scales the effect proportionately without changing the timing of when past changes affect current values of a variable. What I am going to argue is that the size of the shock may lead to changes in economic behavior that change the coefficients in the statistical models. In less jargony words, the degree of sluggish behavior of economic variables to a policy surprise is not constant but can change with the size and nature of the shock.5 There are a lot of reasons to think that "big shocks travel fast," meaning they elicit a change in economic behavior that would not be associated with small shocks. In the past year the FOMC has raised rates faster than it has in forty years, so we should be skeptical about whether statistical models based on historical experience will be reliable in estimating lags for such an unusual event. To support this line of reasoning, let me use some examples to illustrate the concept that big shocks travel fast. First, a large area of economic research focuses on the idea of "rational inattention."6The basic idea is that households and firms have a limited amount of attention that they can dedicate to processing information. It is costly and time consuming to constantly adjust behavior and portfolios in response to small changes in prices or interest rates. Consequently, people must decide which data to focus on and how often they look at it. Because households and firms "rationally ignore" certain data and only look at them infrequently, their behavior looks sluggish in how they respond to small shocks. But this sluggishness does not apply when big shocks hit. For example, large changes in interest rates will get a lot of attention and have a much faster and dramatic impact on consumption, saving and portfolio allocation. The apparently "sluggish behavior" based on small shocks disappears, and households and firms change their behavior much more quickly. Big changes in policy rates will tend to cause more rapid changes in behavior, which implies monetary policy lags will be shorter when changes to the policy rate are large and rapid. As a second example, consider the frequency at which firms change their prices. Data show that firms typically adjust their prices once a year, which is usually interpreted to mean that prices are "sticky." However, recent evidence shows that because of the big inflation shock that occurred over the past two years, prices have changed more frequently as firms tried to keep their relative prices in line with rapidly changing market conditions. This fact has important implications for the Phillips curve model that economists use to link unemployment and inflation. The shift in frequency of price setting will affect the slope (the coefficient), which indicates how sensitive inflation is to a change in unemployment. I addressed this issue in a speech earlier this year.7Using historical data, where the frequency of price adjustment was about once a year, this had the effect of pinning down the slope of the Phillips curve. The Phillips curve was estimated to be very flat. The implication is that unemployment has to increase a lot to bring inflation down by a small amount. But, with the more frequent price changes lately, the Phillips curve has steepened. This steepening implies that monetary policy will affect inflation faster and with less effect on the unemployment rate than would occur if price changes were slower. So once again, the lags between changes in monetary policy and inflation should be shorter than historical experience tells us, and as is reflected in models. What is the implication of this economic research? The effects of policy tightening last year are feeding through to market interest rates faster than typically thought because of announcement effects, and on top of this we have had policy rate changes that have been more dramatic and faster than in the past which most likely has led to a more rapid adjustment in the behavior of households and firms. These two points suggest that the effects of the large policy changes that we undertook last year should hit economic activity and inflation much faster than is typically predicted. If one believes the bulk of the effects from last year's tightening have passed through the economy already, then we can't expect much more slowing of demand and inflation from that tightening. To me, this means that the policy tightening we have conducted this year has been appropriate and also that more policy tightening will be needed to bring inflation back to our 2 percent target. Pausing rate hikes now, because you are waiting for long and variable lags to arrive, may leave you standing on the platform waiting for a train that has already left the station. Economic OutlookLet me now turn to my third topic: how I see things standing today. Economic activity reportedly grew 2 percent in the first quarter, and based on economic data through early July, the Atlanta Fed's GDP projection suggests growth was a touch higher in the second quarter. Recent Institute for Supply Management surveys suggest some continued slowing in the manufacturing sector, but activity outside that sector is still growing at a solid pace. Turning to the labor market, it has been very tight for a long time and the most recent jobs report showed that employers added 209,000 jobs in June. This number came in a little lower than expected, and it is down noticeably from this time last year. Meanwhile, data on job openings showed some welcome signs of cooling. The ratio of job vacancies to the number of people counted as unemployed has declined on balance so far this year, and the number of people quitting their jobs, which I tend to think of as moving for higher wages, has moved down from its peak last year. However, despite these welcome signs of softening, the labor market is still very robust. Job growth is still well above the pre-pandemic average, the unemployment rate remains quite low, and wage growth continues to be above what would support returning inflation to 2 percent. Yesterday, we received new data on consumer price index (CPI) inflation. After 5 consecutive monthly readings of core inflation of 0.4 percent or above, this rate dropped by half in June, to 0.2 percent. This is welcome news, but one data point does not make a trend. Inflation briefly slowed in the summer of 2021 before getting much worse, so I am going to need to see this improvement sustained before I am confident that inflation has decelerated. In terms of the latest banking data, the Federal Reserve's weekly release of assets and liabilities of commercial banks (the H.8 data release) suggests that banks are responding in a way that is consistent with monetary policy tightening but not banking stress. For example, growth in core loans on banks' books has decelerated since late 2022, as banks tightened lending standards and demand slowed amid lagged effects from monetary policy tightening. The deceleration in core loan balances was especially pronounced in early 2023 even before the Silicon Valley Bank collapse and has continued afterwards. And we did see discrete effects in deposit outflows in mid-March, but those flows have stabilized. Moreover, banks have been able to replace core deposit outflows with large time deposits, Federal Home Loan Bank advances and other sources of funding. These actions are leading to a slowdown in credit growth, but one that is in line with monetary policy tightening. So, what does this mean for monetary policy? With the banking sector sound and resilient, fighting inflation remains my top priority, and I believe we will get there. What will get us there is setting the stance of policy at a level that will continue to help bring supply and demand in the economy into better balance. While I expect inflation to eventually settle near our 2 percent target because of our policy actions, we have to make sure what we saw in yesterday's inflation report feeds through broadly across goods and services and that we do not revert back to what has been persistently high core inflation. The robust strength of the labor market and the solid overall performance of the U.S. economy gives us room to tighten policy further. As things stand now, my outlook for the stance of monetary policy that will get inflation near the FOMC's 2 percent target is roughly consistent with the FOMC's economic projections in June. I see two more 25-basis-point hikes in the target range over the four remaining meetings this year as necessary to keep inflation moving toward our target. Furthermore, I believe we will need to keep policy restrictive for some time in order to have inflation settle down around our 2% target. Since the June meeting, with another month of data to evaluate lending conditions, I am more confident that the banking turmoil is not going to result in a significant problem for the economy, and I see no reason why the first of those two hikes should not occur at our meeting later this month. From there, I will need to see how the data come in. If inflation does not continue to show progress and there are no suggestions of a significant slowdown in economic activity, then a second 25-basis-point hike should come sooner rather than later, but that decision is for the future. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Typically, economists look at the difference between the actual policy rate change and the expected change from federal funds rate futures. So, if the FOMC raised the policy rate by 25-basis points and the market expected a 10-basis point hike (meaning the market pricing reflected a 40 percent probability of a 25 basis point hike and 60 percent probability of no change) this would correspond to a policy surprise of 15 basis points.Return to text 3. See Christopher J. Waller (2022),"Reflections on Monetary Policy in 2021,"speech delivered at the 2022 Hoover Institution Monetary Conference, Stanford, Calif., May 6.Return to text 4. Recent analysis by Fed economists shows the announcement effects of policy have in fact led to a shortening in monetary policy lags. See Taeyoung Doh and Andrew T. Foerster (2022),"Have Lags in Monetary Policy Transmission Shortened?"Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Economic Bulletin,December 21.Return to text 5. Most economists will recognize this application of the Lucas Critique.Return to text 6. See the recent survey article by Bartosz Maćkowiak, Filip Matějka, and Mirko Wiederholt (2023),"Rational Inattention: A Review,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 61 (March), pp. 226–73.Return to text 7. See Christopher J. Waller (2023),"The Unstable Phillips Curve,"speech delivered at Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy, a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif., March 31.Return to text
Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell will host a town hall with educators on September 28, 2023, at 4:00 p.m. ET. During the event, the Chair will respond to questions from the in-person audience and participants who will join the event virtually from across the country. The event will be broadcast atfederalreserve.govand atyoutube.com/federalreserve.Viewers can follow the Federal Reserve Board on Twitter at@FederalReserve, on Facebook atfacebook.com/federalreserve, and join in on the discussion by using the hashtag: #FedTownHall. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Michael S. Gibson, Director of Supervision and Regulation Before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Watch Live Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Foster, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's supervisory work related to the financial risks of climate change. The Federal Reserve's responsibilities with respect to climate change are important, but narrow. These responsibilities are tightly linked to our responsibilities for bank supervision and financial stability. Because climate change could pose challenges for the financial system, it is important that we better understand these risks. Our primary focus is to evaluate whether banks operate in a safe and sound manner and manage all material risks, including climate-related financial risks. We are also working rigorously to identify and measure how climate change could increase financial sector vulnerabilities and amplify shocks. My remarks today will focus on the Federal Reserve's supervisory work. Before proceeding, it is important to emphasize two general points about our approach. First, the Federal Reserve recognizes that decisions about policies to address climate change itself should be made by the elected branches of government. As Chair Powell stated earlier this year, the Federal Reserve is not a climate policymaker.1The Federal Reserve's supervisory responsibilities are focused on understanding and mitigating the potential impact of climate change on supervised banks. Second, it is not and never has been the Federal Reserve's policy to discourage banks from offering accounts or services to any class or type of law-abiding business, and this is not a part of our work looking into climate-related financial risk. Supervision OverviewOur supervisory work related to the financial risks from climate change is based on our core responsibility to ensure that banks understand and appropriately manage all material risks, including any related to climate change. Weaknesses in how banks identify, measure, monitor, and control climate-related financial risks could adversely affect a bank's safety and soundness. To fulfill this supervisory responsibility, the Federal Reserve is working to better understand the potential implications of climate change for supervised banks, engaging with large banks, pursuing independent analysis on potential risks and opportunities, discussing issues with a wide range of external experts, and monitoring industry developments. Banks are likely to be affected by both the physical risks and transition risks associated with climate change, collectively known as climate-related financial risks. Physical risks refer to the harm to people and property arising from acute, climate-related events, such as hurricanes, wildfires, and floods, and chronic shifts in climate, including higher average temperatures, changes in precipitation patterns, and sea level rise. Transition risks refer to stresses to institutions or sectors arising from the shifts in consumer and business sentiment, technologies, or policy associated with the changes that would be part of a transition to a lower carbon economy. These risk drivers can manifest as traditional banking risks, including as the credit, market, liquidity, operational, and legal risks that are at the core of a bank's traditional risk-management framework. While there is considerable uncertainty about the timing and magnitude of the impact of climate change across different institutions with different risk profiles, it is prudent to build capacity to better understand the range of risks. Large banks, for example, are increasingly focused on the risks and opportunities that climate change brings, and supervisors need to understand this. The Federal Reserve has two near-term supervisory priorities related to the financial risks of climate change: issuing interagency guidance for large banks and conducting a pilot climate-scenario analysis exercise. Both of these will deepen our understanding of climate-related financial risks and support the resiliency of supervised firms. I will briefly discuss each of these efforts. GuidanceLast December, the Federal Reserve asked for public comment on draft guidance providing a high-level framework for the safe and sound management of exposures to climate-related financial risks for large banks.2The principles-based guidance would apply only to banks with over $100 billion in total consolidated assets. These proposed principles are substantially similar to the proposed principles issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) in December 2021 and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in March 2022. The proposed guidance contains high-level principles covering six areas: governance; policies, procedures, and limits; strategic planning; risk management; data, risk measurement, and reporting; and scenario analysis. The guidance also describes how climate-related financial risks can be addressed in specific prudential risk areas including credit, liquidity, other financial risks, operational, legal and compliance, and other nonfinancial risks. The Federal Reserve received a large number of comments, and staff are carefully reviewing all of the comments received. We intend to coordinate with the OCC and FDIC in issuing any final guidance to promote consistency across supervision of large financial institutions. Scenario AnalysisClimate scenario analysis—in which the resilience of financial institutions is reviewed under different climate scenarios—is an emerging risk-management and supervisory tool used to evaluate climate-related financial risks. The pilot climate scenario analysis (CSA) exercise launched in January with six of the largest banks. This exercise was designed with two objectives: to learn about large banking organizations' climate risk-management practices and challenges and to enhance the ability of both large banking organizations and supervisors to identify, measure, monitor, and manage climate-related financial risks.3The exercise is expected to conclude by the end of the year. The six participating banks will analyze the impact of scenarios for both physical and transition risks related to climate change on specific assets in their portfolios. We will gather qualitative and quantitative information over the course of the pilot, including details on governance and risk-management practices, measurement methodologies, risk metrics, data challenges, and lessons learned. The Federal Reserve expects to publish insights gained from the pilot, reflecting what we learn about climate risk-management practices and how insights from scenario analysis will help identify potential risks and promote effective risk-management practices. No firm-specific information will be released. I should emphasize that we view climate scenario analyses as distinct and separate from the Federal Reserve's supervisory stress test. The Federal Reserve's stress test is designed to assess whether large banking organizations have enough capital to continue lending to households and businesses during a severe recession and financial market shock. The pilot CSA exercise, on the other hand, is exploratory in nature and does not have consequences for bank capital or supervisory implications. ConclusionAs I mentioned at the beginning of my testimony, the Federal Reserve's role with respect to climate change is important, but narrow. The Federal Reserve has a duty to understand risks to the safety and soundness of the banks it oversees and to the financial system, including the financial risks from climate change. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 1. Chair Jerome H. Powell,Panel on "Central Bank Independence and the Mandate—Evolving Views,"speech at the Symposium on Central Bank Independence, Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm, Sweden, January 10, 2023.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposed Principles Providing a High-Level Framework for the Safe and Sound Management of Exposures to Climate-Related Financial Risks for Large Banking Organizations,"news release, December 2, 2022.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis (CSA) Exercise: Participant Instructions(Washington: Board of Governors, January 2023).Return to text
The Federal Reserve on Thursday announced that its new system for instant payments, the FedNow®Service, is now live. Banks and credit unions of all sizes can sign up and use this tool to instantly transfer money for their customers, any time of the day, on any day of the year. "The Federal Reserve built the FedNow Service to help make everyday payments over the coming years faster and more convenient," said Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell. "Over time, as more banks choose to use this new tool, the benefits to individuals and businesses will include enabling a person to immediately receive a paycheck, or a company to instantly access funds when an invoice is paid." To start, 35 early-adopting banks and credit unions, as well as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Bureau of the Fiscal Service, are ready with instant payments capabilities via the FedNow Service. In addition, 16 service providers are ready to support payment processing for banks and credit unions. When fully available, instant payments will provide substantial benefits for consumers and businesses, such as when rapid access to funds is useful, or when just-in-time payments help manage cash flows in bank accounts. For example, individuals can instantly receive their paychecks and use them the same day, and small businesses can more efficiently manage cash flows without processing delays. Over the coming years, customers of banks and credit unions that sign up for the service should be able to use their financial institution's mobile app, website, and other interfaces to send instant payments quickly and securely. As an interbank payment system, the FedNow Service operates alongside other longstanding Federal Reserve payment services such as Fedwire®and FedACH®. The Federal Reserve is committed to working with the more than 9,000 banks and credit unions across the country to support the widespread availability of this service for their customers over time. A list of early adopters with instant payment capabilities is attached. Additional information is available on the Federal Reserve Financial Serviceswebsite. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. FedNow® Service Frequently Asked Questions Additional Questions and Answers
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced a consent order and a $268.5 million fine with UBS Group AG, of Zurich, Switzerland, for misconduct by Credit Suisse, which UBS subsequently acquired in June 2023. The misconduct involved Credit Suisse's unsafe and unsound counterparty credit risk management practices with its former counterparty, Archegos Capital Management LP. In 2021, Credit Suisse suffered approximately $5.5 billion in losses because of the default of Archegos, an investment fund. During Credit Suisse's relationship with Archegos, Credit Suisse failed to adequately manage the risk posed by Archegos despite repeated warnings. The Board is requiring Credit Suisse to improve counterparty credit risk management practices and to address additional longstanding deficiencies in other risk management programs at Credit Suisse's U.S. operations. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with actions by the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority and the Bank of England's Prudential Regulation Authority. The penalties announced by the Board and the Prudential Regulation Authority total approximately $387 million. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Capital One Financial Corporation, McLean, VirginiaCease and Desist Order dated August 4, 2020Terminated July 5, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Following its stress test earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board today announced the individual capital requirements for all large banks, effective on October 1. Large bank capital requirements are in part determined by the Board's stress test results, which provide a risk-sensitive and forward-looking assessment of capital needs. The table shows each bank's total common equity tier 1 capital requirement, which is made up of several components, including: If a bank's capital dips below its total requirement announced today, the bank is subject to automatic restrictions on both capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. The Board received no requests for reconsideration from any bank. Separately, due to two banks submitting incorrect data, the Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released corrected stress test results for Bank of America Corporation and The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation. The revisions from the incorrect submissions do not result in a change to either bank's stress capital buffer requirement. In its review of these banks' data, the Board conducted reviews of the other banks that underwent the stress test and found no errors in their submissions. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Large Bank Capital Requirements (PDF) 2023 Federal Reserve Stress Test Results (PDF) Stress Test Results, 2013-2023 (CSV)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced two enforcement actions against Deutsche Bank AG, its New York branch, and other U.S. affiliates. First, the Board issued a consent order and a $186 million fine based on unsafe and unsound practices and violations of the Board's 2015 and 2017 consent orders with Deutsche Bank relating to sanctions compliance and anti-money laundering controls. The Board found that Deutsche Bank made insufficient remedial progress under the 2015 and 2017 consent orders and had deficient anti-money laundering internal controls and governance processes relating to its prior relationship with the Estonian branch of Danske Bank. This consent order requires Deutsche Bank to prioritize completion of several critical requirements of the Board's prior orders. Separately, the Board announced a Written Agreement to address other general deficiencies relating to Deutsche Bank's governance, risk management, and controls. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Herring Bancorp, Inc., Amarillo, TexasCease and Desist Order dated June 29, 2023 Quontic Bank Acquisition Corp., Astoria, New York, and Quontic Bank Holdings Corp., Astoria, New YorkWritten Agreement dated July 5, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At "Fair Housing at 55—Advancing a Blueprint for Equity" National Fair Housing Alliance 2023 National Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the invitation to join you in commemorating 55 years since the Fair Housing Act became law.1Along with the Voting Rights Act, the Fair Housing Act was an essential step in making good on the promise of the Civil Rights Act, and of the vision of Dr. Martin Luther King, to build a fair and equal society. Let me also acknowledge the work of the National Fair Housing Alliance (NFHA), its members, and their partner organizations in pursuit of this goal. As with other aspects of America's journey toward equality, today we can recognize the progress made in fair housing while also acknowledging how much farther we have to go and recommitting ourselves to reaching that destination. We need to do that because everyone deserves a fair and equal opportunity. And as we saw in the global financial crisis, failure to pay attention to discriminatory and predatory practices can have a devastating effect on our economy. Fair Lending Supervision and EnforcementI'll start with a few words on the Federal Reserve's role in eradicating discrimination in lending. As we are here to commemorate, Congress acted in 1968 to make discrimination in housing illegal with the Fair Housing Act, and it passed the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) in 1974 to bar lending discrimination. These landmark laws—now 55 and 40 years old—are the foundation of the Federal Reserve's work in this area, we use our supervisory and enforcement authority to ensure these laws are followed. Fair lending violations can come in the form of disparate treatment, which is when a lender treats a credit applicant differently on the basis of a prohibited factor, as well as disparate impact, when a lender applies a racially neutral policy or practice that disproportionately excludes or burdens certain persons on a prohibited basis. We believe that the disparate impact test is an important tool to ensure that lending decisions are fair. Congress provided regulators with supervisory and enforcement tools to help ensure that supervised firms resolve consumer protection weaknesses as well as the more pervasive risk-management issues that often lead to those weaknesses. We evaluate fair lending at each consumer compliance exam and engage a specialized team of lawyers, economists, and analysts to help ensure we evaluate fair lending issues thoroughly and consistently across firms. In these examinations, we evaluate the potential for discriminatory conduct based on the lending activities of the institution and the risk that discriminatory conduct may occur with respect to each of these activities.2Our examinations look at outcomes—what was a firm's lending record on mortgages? Were there disparities in pricing? What was the extent of customer complaints? We also look under the hood, considering a firm's marketing and outreach, the discretion and financial incentives granted to loan officers, and a firm's branching strategy. If we determine that a bank has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, we refer the matter to the Department of Justice (DOJ). Federal Reserve referrals have resulted in DOJ actions in critical areas, such as redlining and mortgage-pricing discrimination.3Last fall, the DOJ took action against a bank for mortgage pricing discrimination based on a Federal Reserve referral.4 Beyond referring matters to the DOJ, we have a broad array of tools to address consumer compliance violations and deficiencies, including supervisory findings and memoranda of understanding that require the bank to take corrective action and remediate consumer harm. We also conduct outreach efforts that actively promote sound compliance management practices and programs, including regular outreach by our Reserve Banks to state member banks and our public webinar series.5 Fair Lending Implications of InnovationAs our financial system evolves, it is critical that we adapt our application of the Fair Housing Act and ECOA to deal with technological change and other developments. The digital economy has produced alternative data sources, some of which can provide a window into the creditworthiness of an individual who does not have a standard credit history. And new artificial intelligence techniques such as machine learning have the potential to leverage these data at scale and at low cost to expand credit to people who otherwise can't access it. While these technologies have enormous potential, they also carry risks of violating fair lending laws and perpetuating the very disparities that they have the potential to address. Use of machine learning or other artificial intelligence may perpetuate or even amplify bias or inaccuracies inherent in the data used to train the system or make incorrect predictions if that data set is incomplete or nonrepresentative.6There are also risks that the data points used could be correlated with a protected class and lack a sufficient nexus to creditworthiness. For instance, digital redlining in marketing—the use of criteria to exclude majority-minority communities or minority applications—is one risk, and it has already been the subject of several settlements, including one several years ago involving the NFHA and Facebook.7Digital redlining may result if advertisers select their audiences based on a characteristic that is correlated with protected characteristics.8New technologies can also result in "reverse redlining," or steering in the advertisement of more expensive or otherwise inferior products to minority communities. These risks are amplified when a model is opaque and lacks a sufficient degree of explainability—the degree to which the bank can understand how data, variables, and other features inform the credit decisions. While banks are still in the early days of adopting artificial intelligence and other machine learning technologies, we are working to ensure that our supervision keeps pace. Through our supervisory process, we evaluate whether firms have proper risk management and controls, including with respect to those new technologies.9 CRA Final RuleFollowing the Fair Housing Act and ECOA, Congress recognized that more needed to be done to address redlining and other systemic inequities in access to credit, investment, and banking services and it passed the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in 1977 to do that. I have spent much of my career thinking and writing about aspects of fair lending and the role of the CRA, and I'm honored for the opportunity to now lead the Federal Reserve's efforts to update the rule. As you are well aware, the Federal Reserve is working in partnership with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to release a final rule for the CRA. The proposal would adapt the regulations to address changes in the banking sector, including internet and mobile banking, and update the approach to assessment areas. It also would provide more clarity, consistency, and transparency for CRA evaluations and eligible activities. The agencies are benefitting from the thoughtful comment letters we received on the proposal, and all three agencies are hard at work finalizing the rule. Once finalized, it is my hope and belief that this new CRA final rule, in parallel with the existing protections of the Fair Housing Act and ECOA, will support bank lending, investing, and services that meet the needs of all communities, including those that continue to be underserved. Special Purpose Credit ProgramsAnd to that end, let me highlight one way that public interest and trade groups and banks can come together to bring credit to where it counts. Special Purpose Credit Programs (SPCPs) are one method to address discrimination and bias in mortgage credit transactions, and many large financial institutions have publicly stated that they initiated or expanded special purpose credit programs in the past year. As you know, SPCPs support the creation of lending products to promote access to credit for economically disadvantaged groups of people and can be designed to benefit those who are members of protected classes under Fair Lending laws. In 2022, federal agencies, including the Federal Reserve, issued a statement to remind creditors of the process for creating these programs.10I know that NFHA worked with the Mortgage Bankers Association on an online toolkit for banks to create SPCPs, and that many large banks have adopted this approach.11 Policy Developments to Address Appraisal Discrimination and Bias in Housing Mortgage Credit TransactionsLet me touch on two recent initiatives we've taken to address appraisal discrimination and bias in housing mortgage credit transactions. On June 1 of this year, several agencies invited public comment on a proposed rule designed to ensure the credibility and integrity of automated valuation models.12On June 8, the agencies also invited public comment on guidance that would highlight risks associated with deficient home appraisals. The guidance describes how financial institutions may incorporate "reconsiderations of value" into their processes and controls around home appraisals.13Deficient collateral valuations can contain inaccuracies because of errors, omissions, or discrimination that affects the value of the appraisal, and a reconsideration of value may help to properly value the real estate. I am fully supportive of both these proposals because homeownership is an important way for families to build wealth, and we should give them every opportunity to share in those benefits. ConclusionIn closing, promoting fair and equitable treatment to all consumers is the right thing to do, and this is also just good business. Ensuring that potential borrowers are treated equally can mean developing previously underserved communities, creating more opportunities for lending, and expanding markets which can result in better returns for banks. Fair lending is safe and sound lending. By adopting sound credit policies that include fair lending principles and controls on loan officer discretion, and by maintaining strong compliance management practices, banks can help advance a safer and fairer financial system. Let me stress how important it is to remain ever vigilant against discrimination in credit transactions. I appreciate the work of NFHA, you in the audience, and others, who are on the front lines of fighting discrimination in housing and lending. Thank you, for inviting me here today, and enjoy the conference. 1. The views I express here are my own and not those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See the Interagency Fair Lending Examination Procedures (August 2009), available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/caletters/2009/0906/09-06_attachment.pdf.Return to text 3. See, e.g., the DOJ consent orders with Midwest BankCentre athttps://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2013/04/15/mbcsettle.pdf; SunTrust Mortgage athttps://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2012/09/17/suntrustsettle.pdf; and Countrywide Financial Corporation athttps://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2012/01/27/countrywidesettle.pdf, andhttp://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-reaches-335-million-settlement-resolve-allegations-lending-discrimination.Return to text 4. See the DOJ consent order with Evolve Bank and Trust athttps://www.justice.gov/d9/case-documents/attachments/2022/10/17/settle_evolve-final-10-19.pdf.Return to text 5. The Board annually sponsors an interagency webinar on fair lending supervision. During the 2022 webinar, over 6,000 financial institutions registered, the majority of which were community banks. These webinars are archived and free to the public. See "Consumer Compliance Outlook Live" athttps://www.consumercomplianceoutlook.org/outlook-live/archives/.Return to text 6. SeeRequest for Information and Comment on Financial Institutions' Use of Artificial Intelligence, Including Machine Learning86 Fed. Reg. 16,837 (March 31, 2021).Return to text 7. National Fair Housing Alliance, et. al, Summary of Settlements Between Civil Rights Advocates and Facebook (March 19, 2019), available athttps://nationalfairhousing.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/3.18.2019-Joint-Statement-FINAL-1.pdf.Return to text 8. The Federal Reserve has highlighted some potential fair lending risks associated with digital marketing activities in Consumer Compliance Outlook Live webinars and ways banks can mitigate them. For instance, in 2021, the Federal Reserve presentation at the annual interagency fair lending webinar covered fair lending risks relating to use of alternative data and machine learning in credit marketing. One of the risk mitigation strategies discussed during the webinar was taking steps to ensure that institutions review use of all criteria or filters in internet-based marketing and outreach activities to understand whether a third-party advertising platform utilizes filters that could exclude majority-minority communities or minority applicants. See "Fintech & Fair Lending Risk," Federal Reserve presentation at 2021 Fair Lending Interagency Webinar (December 2021), available athttps://www.consumercomplianceoutlook.org/Outlook-Live/2021/2021-Fair-Lending-Interagency-webinar/.Return to text 9. For instance, the banking agencies' model risk-management guidance outlines key steps to confirm that a model is fit for its purpose, reliable, and stable—including independent validation. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Guidance on Model Risk Management,"SR letter 11-7 (April 4, 2011).Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, et al.,"Interagency Statement on Special Purpose Credit Programs Under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and Regulation B,"CA letter 22-2 (February 22, 2022).Return to text 11. National Fair Housing Alliance, Special Purpose Credit Program Toolkit, available at https://spcptoolkit.com/.Return to text 12.Quality Control Standards for Automated Valuation Models (PDF), 88 Fed. Reg. 40,638 (proposed June 21, 2023) (to be codified at 12 C.F.R. pt.1026).Return to text 13. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, FDIC, and National Credit Union Administration, and OCC, Interagency Guidance on Reconsiderations of Value of Residential Real Estate Valuations (proposed), available athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20230608a2.pdf.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Bipartisan Policy Center, Washington, D.C. Thank you to the Bipartisan Policy Center for the opportunity to speak today. I'm here to report on my holistic review of capital for large banks and to outline steps that I believe are appropriate to update our capital standards so that banks can continue to serve our communities, households, and businesses.1 The review was a top priority because capital is fundamental to safety and soundness. I approached the task with humility. We need to be skeptical about the ability of bank managers or regulators to anticipate all emerging risks. Events over the past few months have only reinforced the need for humility and skepticism, and for an approach that makes banks resilient to both familiar and unanticipated risks. Our dynamic financial system is complex and constantly evolving. Regulators and bank managers are limited in our ability to comprehensively identify risks and to measure them. We cannot fully appreciate how a specific vulnerability can interact with other vulnerabilities to amplify and propagate risk in the face of a shock, or multiple shocks. It is extremely difficult to identify shocks in advance. And we also cannot fully predict how firms and markets adapt to changes in the environment or to the behavior of regulators or other participants. So, instead of trying to design rules to address every conceivable risk, regulators must focus broadly on resilience—ensuring that banks and the financial system can withstand challenges, wherever they emerge and however they are transmitted through the system. Fortunately, there is a component of bank funding—equity capital—that is well suited to building resilience.2Banks rely on both debt and capital to fund loans and other assets, but capital is what allows the bank to take a loss and keep on operating. The beauty of capital is that it doesn't care about the source of the loss. Whatever the vulnerability or the shock, capital is able to help absorb the resulting loss and, if sufficient, allow the bank to keep serving its critical role in the economy. Higher levels of capital also provide incentives to a bank's managers and shareholders to prudently manage the bank's risk, since they bear more of the risk of the bank's activities. Holistic Review of Capital StandardsI initiated a review of capital standards as one of my first actions as Vice Chair for Supervision. This review was focused on capital requirements for large banks with more than $100 billion in total assets. Capital requirements are multi-layered with different components. A holistic approach is important because the requirements function as a system—each component treats risks and associated capital needs differently, but all components together result in a certain amount of capital required. Banks manage their operations with an eye on the entire system, and as such, adjustments to one part of the regime may imply adjustments to another. To that end, over the last nine months, I have engaged with a wide range of parties: policymakers and staff from the Federal Reserve and other agencies, banks and financial sector groups, public interest groups, members of Congress, and academics to get a broad perspective on how the Fed's capital standards interact with each other and the result they together achieve. In the midst of this review, we once again learned the importance of resilience when a sudden bank run and contagion caused three large banks to fail and we experienced significant stress in the banking system, stemmed only by invocation of the systemic risk exception and creation of an emergency lending facility. This should make us very humble indeed. I reviewed whether changes would be appropriate to better align capital requirements with risk-taking, to help ensure that our banking system is sufficiently resilient to serve its vital role in our economy. Any proposed changes would go through the standard notice-and-comment rulemaking process, allowing all interested parties ample time to weigh in on the proposed changes. Any final changes to capital requirements would occur with appropriate transition times. I will be pursuing further changes to regulation and supervision in response to the recent banking stress, including how we regulate and supervise liquidity, interest rate risk, and incentive compensation, as well as improving the speed, agility, and force of the Federal Reserve's supervision. I expect to have more to say on these topics in the coming months. Multiple Measures of RiskOur system of capital requirements uses multiple measures of risk, which work collectively to achieve an overall level of resilience. We have a set of risk-based requirements that are based on the risk of a bank's activities to its safety and soundness and to the financial system, and a set of non-risk-sensitive backstops, which are simple measures the market and regulators can use to understand and protect against the possibility that the risk-sensitive measures get the risk wrong and result in capital requirements that are too low. And we use stress testing as a complement to point-in-time capital requirements. Stress tests measure bank resilience against a hypothetical shock. These equity capital requirements are complemented by long-term debt requirements, which help provide an additional cushion to restructure, sell, or wind down a bank that has entered resolution. These multiple ways of measuring and mitigating risk are helpful for the resiliency of banks and the robustness of the system. Any single way of measuring bank risk would miss or underplay some aspect of risk, and each of the different approaches tends to measure risks not captured or measured as well by the others. Further, a capital framework with multiple ways of measuring risk is harder for banks to game. Of course, there are also downsides to having multiple approaches to measuring risk in calculating capital requirements. The greater complexity itself introduces risk. But on balance, I think multiple approaches are warranted. Conclusion of the Holistic ReviewNow let me turn to the conclusion of the holistic review. In sum, I believe that the existing approach to capital requirements is sound. As a result, my proposals build on that foundation. The existing approach includes the risk-based requirements, stress testing, the risk-based capital buffers, and the leverage requirements and buffers. Let me quickly summarize the proposal and then turn to each in more detail. With respect to risk-based requirements, the standards should be updated to better reflect credit, trading, and operational risk. To help promote international comparability, the updates to the standards should be consistent with international standards adopted by the Basel Committee. The international standards were developed through a rigorous, lengthy process, have been under discussion for nearly a decade and will improve on the extent to which capital requirements fully reflect the risks posed by different banks engaged in a variety of activities. With respect to stress testing, I believe that the stress capital buffer framework is sound.3At the same time, I believe that the stress test should continue to evolve to better capture risk. The exploratory analysis conducted this year demonstrates the capacity of supervisory stress testing to test for a wider range of risks and the value of doing so. Any changes to the stress test should be complementary to the changes to the risk-based capital framework I mentioned above. With respect to the other capital buffers—the global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge4and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB)5—I am not recommending fundamental changes. For the G-SIB surcharge, I am recommending that we improve the measurement of systemic indicators under the G-SIB surcharge framework, reduce "cliff effects," and increase the sensitivity of the surcharge to changes in a bank's risk profile. With respect to the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (eSLR), I am not recommending changes to the calibration at this time. With the revisions in risk-based capital requirements I mentioned above, the eSLR generally would not act as the binding constraint at the holding company level, where Treasury market intermediation occurs. We will carefully monitor Treasury market intermediation, and if problems arise, will consider appropriate policy responses. Basel III EndgameAn important aspect of my proposals will be to implement the changes to the risk-based capital requirements, referred to as the Basel III endgame, which are intended to ensure that our minimum capital requirements require banks to hold adequate capital against their risk-taking. There was a consensus among the Basel jurisdictions that current rules underestimate risks for the largest, most complex banks. The proposed reforms reflect our current understanding of risks and how to best measure those risks. The international agreement to implement these reforms was finalized more than five years ago, in 2017. Implementing these reforms in a timely way is important, and I am pleased we are beginning that process. And lastly, before I walk through the main areas of changes, I'd like to emphasize that any changes would not be fully effective for some years because of the notice and comment rulemaking process and any final rule would provide for an appropriate transition. First, for a firm's lending activities, the proposed rules would end the practice of relying on banks' own individual estimates of their own risk and instead use a more transparent and consistent approach. Currently, large banks use their own internal models to estimate certain types of credit risk. These internal models for credit risk suffer from several deficiencies. Experience suggests that banks tend to underestimate their credit risk because they have a strong incentive to lower their capital requirements. In addition, the data doesn't lend itself to robust modeling and back testing in some cases because defaults are relatively infrequent. And estimates of credit risk for similar exposures can vary substantially across firms. So, skepticism is in order. Standardized credit risk approaches—meaning we apply the same requirements to each bank and not let each bank develop their own requirements—appear to do a reasonably good job of approximating risks. And we have the additional rigor of a supervisory stress test to assess the credit risk of lending activities. Second, for a firm's trading activities, the proposed rules would adjust the way that the firm measures market risk, which is the risk of loss from movements in market prices, such as interest rate, equity price, foreign exchange, and commodities risk. The proposed changes better align market risk capital requirements with market risk exposure and provide supervisors with improved tools. The proposal would continue to permit firms to use internal models to capture the complex dynamics of most market risks but would not rely on banks modeling certain market risks that are too hard to model. Internal models of market risk can be more readily validated than internal models of credit risk because they are based on daily data and outcomes generally are known relatively quickly. The proposal would raise model quality standards. Firms would also be required to model risk at the level of individual trading desks for particular asset classes, instead of at the firm level. The proposal would also introduce a standardized approach that is well-aligned with the modeled approach, for use where the modeled approach is not feasible. These changes would raise market risk capital requirements by correcting for gaps in the current rules. Requiring banks to model market risk at the level of individual trading desks better reflects the observation that correlations across risks can change dramatically in times of stress. Requiring banks to use a standardized approach for hard-to-model risks is appropriate, in light of the weaknesses that were exposed in the 2008 financial crisis, when many firms did not have acceptable models for their risks. In addition, the proposal appropriately charges more capital for positions that are less liquid, in order to better capture the risks of illiquid trading positions. Third, for operational losses—such as trading losses or litigation expenses—the proposed rules would replace an internal modeled operational risk requirement with a standardized measure. The proposal would approximate a firm's operational risk charge based on the firm's activities, and adjust the charge upward based on a firm's historical operational losses to add risk sensitivity and provide firms with an incentive to mitigate their operational risk. One important question involves the size of institutions that the new risk-based capital rules should apply to, and I will recommend that the enhanced capital rules apply to banks and bank holding companies with $100 billion or more in assets. A threshold of $100 billion would subject more banks to our most risk-sensitive capital rules compared to the current framework, which applies to firms that are internationally active or have $700 billion or more in assets. This expanded scope is appropriate for two reasons. First, the proposed rules are less burdensome for banks to implement than the current requirements, since they don't require a bank to develop a suite of internal credit risk and operational risk models to calculate regulatory capital. Second, our recent experience shows that even banks of this size can cause stress that spreads to other institutions and threatens financial stability. The risk of contagion implies that we need a greater degree of resilience for these firms than we previously thought, as the losses posed to society by the failure of a given firm are greater, and the probability that another firm may be a victim to another firm's failure are higher. The enhancements to the capital rules should improve the resilience of these firms. Importantly, the proposed adjustments would require banks with assets of $100 billion or more to account for unrealized losses and gains in their available-for-sale (AFS) securities when calculating their regulatory capital. This change would improve the transparency of regulatory capital ratios, since it would better reflect banking organizations' actual loss-absorbing capacity. Realizing the losses from these securities, without adequate capital to protect from those losses, was an important part of the set of events that triggered the run on Silicon Valley Bank (SVB). If the bank had already been required to include those losses in its reported capital, it is less likely that the market and depositors would have reacted the same way. Furthermore, banks that were required to reflect unrealized losses on AFS securities in regulatory capital managed their interest rate risk more carefully, suggesting that the requirement to include gains and losses on AFS securities in regulatory capital leads to stronger risk management as well. These changes would increase capital requirements overall, but I want to emphasize that they would principally raise capital requirements for the largest, most complex banks. We will have additional information when the proposal is published, but for now, let me put the proposed increases in context. Recall that banks are, by nature, very leveraged and fund only a small portion of their assets with capital. One can think of the proposal's more accurate risk measures as equivalent to requiring the largest banks hold an additional 2 percentage points of capital, or an additional $2 of capital for every $100 of risk-weighted assets. While this increase in requirements could lead to some changes in bank activities, the benefits of making the financial system more resilient to stresses that could otherwise impair growth are greater. That is not to ignore concerns that changes in capital requirements may cause firms to change their behavior and the way that financial services are provided to our economy. We intend to consider comments carefully and any changes would be implemented with an appropriate phase-in. This phase-in will allow ample time for banks to adjust their balance sheets and activities, and to build capital over time. In fact, most banks already have enough capital today to meet the new requirements. For the banks that would need to build capital to meet the requirements, assuming that they continue to earn money at the same rate as in recent years, we estimate that banks would be able to build the requisite capital through retained earnings in less than 2 years, even while maintaining their dividends. Changes to the Stress Test to Improve Risk CaptureAs part of the holistic review, I have evaluated the Board's stress testing framework. In particular, I have considered whether the proposed changes to the risk-based capital framework should prompt adjustments to stress testing, and whether there are ways the stress test can be improved to make it a more effective test of banks' resilience. I have concluded that the framework for stress testing generally remains sound, but that we should review our global market shock and the stress test's approach to estimating operational risk so that they provide a complementary lens to our risk-based standards on market risk and operational risk, respectively. Banks have raised concerns that the changes to the risk-based capital framework I described earlier, combined with the stress test, result in a "double counting" of risk that is already captured in the minimum requirements. Conceptually, this shouldn't be the case, as the changes in the risk-based capital requirements affect the way that minimum capital requirements are calculated, and the stress test is used to calculate the buffer. But we will seek comments on all elements of the proposed risk-based capital adjustments, including whether interaction with the stress test results in an inappropriate treatment. Fourteen years of stress testing, and the real-life surprises during that time, including the pandemic and the bank stresses this spring, have made it clear that stress tests need to be stressful to adequately prepare banks for unanticipated events. A key strength of stress testing is its ability to be responsive to the rapidly changing conditions by testing bank resilience to emerging or growing risks. In addition, stress testing can be used to assess banks' resilience to different kinds of stress in the financial system. For example, we have long known—and the recent experience with SVB reinforced—the importance of banks' resilience to funding stress. The stress test should evolve to better capture the range of salient risks that banks face. In addition, the Board could use a range of exploratory scenarios to assess banks' resilience to an evolving set of risks and use the results to inform supervision. Minimal Adjustments to the G-SIB Surcharge to Improve PrecisionAs part of the holistic review, I have evaluated whether the proposed changes to the risk-based capital framework should prompt revisions to the G-SIB surcharge. I am not recommending fundamental changes to the underlying framework at this time, but I will be recommending a series of adjustments of a more technical nature that would not reduce the resiliency of the largest banks or the strength of the surcharge. Specifically, I will recommend that the Board propose to adjust the G-SIB surcharge framework to better match a firm's systemic footprint. First, the proposal would measure on an average basis over the full year the indicators that are currently measured only as of year-end. This change would more accurately reflect the systemic risk profile of a firm and reduce incentives for a firm to reduce its G-SIB surcharge by temporarily altering its balance sheet at year end through so-called "window dressing."6Second, the proposal would reduce "cliff effects" in the G-SIB surcharge by measuring G-SIB surcharges in 10-basis point increments instead of the current 50-basis point increments.7Third, the proposal would make improvements to the measurement of some systemic indicators to better align them with risk. These changes would ensure that the G-SIB surcharge better reflects the systemic risk of each G-SIB. Some have argued that certain fixed dollar elements of the G-SIB surcharge should be updated for changes in the economy since the surcharge was adopted. I am not recommending changes to the fixed elements of the calibration of the surcharge. Maintaining the fixed elements of the G-SIB surcharge should help to provide a further incentive for G-SIBs to reduce their systemic footprint, and to promote competitive opportunities for large banks that are not-G-SIBs in order to maintain the diversity of our banking system, while providing further protections against systemically risky events. Continuous Assessment of Capital Needs and the CCyBAs part of the holistic review, I have evaluated whether to adjust the CCyB framework. I do not plan to recommend to the Board that we adjust the CCyB framework. The goal of the countercyclical capital buffer is to build buffers in good times to help prepare for bad times. As called for under our current CCyB framework, I would recommend that the Board activate a positive buffer if macroeconomic conditions suggested that it would be appropriate. Conversely, where times of stress would justify lowering capital buffers, we will consider taking accommodating actions as we did in the midst of the COVID-19 crisis. Calibration of the Enhanced Supplementary Leverage RatioAs part of the holistic review, I have also evaluated whether to adjust the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio. While we should continuously improve our risk-based capital requirements to reflect our understanding of risks, experience has shown that there will be times when banks and regulators are unable to accurately measure all risks. That is why regulators have adopted a leverage ratio, which compares the amount of capital held by banks with their total assets. Leverage requirements do not vary based on risk-weighted assets. They provide a simple, transparent measure of solvency that is useful to banks, markets, and regulators, and a floor on the risk-based approaches. Yet problems can sometimes emerge if leverage ratios are the most binding of the capital requirements because then banks may have an incentive to do less low-risk, low-return activity, and to engage in higher-risk, higher-return activities. Some have argued that when banks are close to the eSLR as a binding constraint that it has reduced Treasury market intermediation. The evidence on that is inconclusive. To the extent it matters, the revisions in risk-based capital requirements I discussed today would mean that the eSLR generally would not act as the binding constraint at the holding company level, where Treasury intermediation occurs. To the extent that there are problems with Treasury market intermediation in the future for which the eSLR might matter, the Board could consider an adjustment. Long-Term DebtA related proposal will be to introduce a long-term debt requirement for all large banks. Long-term debt improves the ability of a bank to be resolved upon failure because the long-term debt can be converted to equity and used to absorb losses. Such a measure would reduce losses borne by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC) Deposit Insurance Fund, and provide the FDIC with additional options for restructuring, selling, or winding down a failed bank. I support applying a long-term debt requirement to all institutions with $100 billion or more in assets. This would add an important safeguard to a class of banks that came under pressure this spring after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank. If SVB had enough long-term debt outstanding, it might have reduced the risk of a run by uninsured depositors; and it might have given the FDIC more options to resolve the bank or merge it with a healthy institution. And importantly, more long-term debt at SVB would have reduced the cost to the FDIC of its resolution. All of these factors would have reduced the risk of contagion to other banks. ConclusionThe comprehensive set of proposals that I have described here today would significantly strengthen our financial system and prepare it for emerging and unanticipated risks, such as those that manifested themselves in the banking system earlier this year. The holistic review began well before then, of course, and the steps proposed here address shortcomings in capital standards that did not begin in March of 2023. But in an obvious way, the failures of SVB and other banks this spring were a warning that banks need to be more resilient, and need more of what is the foundation of that resilience, which is capital. Some industry representatives claim that inadequate capital had nothing to do with those bank failures. I disagree. It was an unsuccessful attempt by SVB to raise capital that caused uninsured depositors to look more closely at how the bank was capitalized. Some industry representatives have claimed that SVB's problems were really related to poor management and shortcomings in the Federal Reserve's supervision. Indeed, those failings were thoroughly documented in a report I released in May, and steps by the Fed to address those issues will be announced in coming months. But it is not logical to argue that failings in supervision must mean that SVB was adequately capitalized—it wasn't—or that supervision by itself can somehow assure safety and soundness throughout the banking system. It is not a choice between supervision and capital regulation—capital is and has always been the foundation of a bank's safety and soundness. Some industry representatives have claimed that raising capital requirements will push activity outside of the regulated financial sector. As I discussed in my speech on capital last December, we need to worry, a lot, about nonbank risks to financial stability.8The answer, however, is not lower capital requirements for banks, but more attention to those nonbank risks. Further, as stress in nonbank financial markets is often transmitted to the banking system, both directly and indirectly, it is critical that banks have enough capital to remain resilient to those stresses. For the reasons I have outlined today, we need to strengthen capital standards for large banks. That process will be deliberative and open to public participation and implementation of any changes agreed to will take a least several years, which is why it is so important to begin now. Everyone in America depends on a safe and stable financial system. By strengthening capital standards, we are ensuring that businesses have credit to grow and hire workers, and deal with the ups and downs in the economy. Stronger capital standards mean workers can depend on getting their paychecks and families can save and borrow to plan for the future. Our goal is a financial system that works for everyone, and having strong capital rules is essential for that. 1. The views I express here are my own, and not those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For a more in-depth discussion of why bank capital matters, see my speech in December 2022 on this topic: Michael S. Barr, "Why Bank Capital Matters," (speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, December 1, 2022).Return to text 3. The stress capital buffer framework uses the results of the supervisory stress test to calibrate a risk-sensitive buffer above a firm's minimum risk-based capital requirements. A firm whose capital ratios are at or below its minimum plus its stress capital buffer requirements and any applicable global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge and countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) is subject to automatic restrictions on capital distributions.Return to text 4. The G-SIB surcharge requires a firm that is identified as a global systemically important bank holding company to hold additional capital based on a measure of the firm's systemic risk.Return to text 5. The CCyB requires a firm to hold additional capital when systemic vulnerabilities are meaningfully above normal.Return to text 6. Window dressing occurs when a firm takes action to reduce the values of its systemic indicators at year-end in a way that is not commensurate with the firm's actual systemic footprint.Return to text 7. Today, a bank's G-SIB surcharge increases in 0.5-percentage point increments (1.0%, 1.5%, 2.0%, etc.). Under the proposal, the G-SIB surcharge would increase in 0.1-percentage point increments (1.0%, 1.1%, 1.2%, etc.)Return to text 8. See Michael S. Barr, "Why Bank Capital Matters," (speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, December 1, 2022).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred from May 22 through June 14. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on June 13–14, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 13-14, 2023:HTML|PDF