Chair Jerome H. Powell swears in Adriana D. Kugler on September 13, 2023, as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Click here for more high-resolution photos. Dr. Adriana D. Kugler took the oath of office as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on Wednesday. The oath was administered by Chair Jerome H. Powell in the press briefing room of the Board's Martin building. President Biden nominated Dr. Kugler on May 12, 2023, and she was confirmed by the United States Senate on September 7, 2023. Her term as a member of the Board ends on January 31, 2026. A biography of each Board member is available on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Adriana D. Kugler biography
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced they are extending the period for giving favorable consideration under their Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations to institutions located outside of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, for bank activities that continue to help revitalize or stabilize these areas devastated by Hurricane Maria. The agencies have determined that a 36-month extension through September 20, 2026 is appropriate given the continuing economic impact of Hurricane Maria from September 2017 in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Activities that help to revitalize or stabilize Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands will be treated consistently with the agencies' originalstatement, which was issued in January 2018. The agencies previously extended the period for giving favorable consideration in May 2021.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Independent Community Bankers of Colorado, Golden Jubilee, Vail, Colorado Thank you for the invitation to join you today, and congratulations on 50 years of working together to better serve the people of Colorado.1As a former community banker, it is always great to be with community bankers and to recognize the importance of your work to strengthen economic opportunities for your communities and your customers. I look forward to hearing more about the issues affecting your institutions and your customers, including the impact of the Federal Reserve's regulation and supervision. Before we turn to our conversation, I'd like to offer a few thoughts on the economy and monetary policy, since the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met earlier this week. As you know, at that meeting, my colleagues and I voted to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent, after raising rates sharply over the past year and a half to reduce inflation. During that time, we have seen considerable progress on lowering inflation, warranting a more gradual pace of increases this year and supporting the decision this week to hold rates steady. However, inflation is still too high, and I expect it will likely be appropriate for the Committee to raise rates further and hold them at a restrictive level for some time to return inflation to our 2 percent goal in a timely way. Most recently, the latest inflation reading based on the consumer price index showed that overall inflation rose, responding in part to higher oil prices. I see a continued risk that energy prices could rise further and reverse some of the progress we have seen on inflation in recent months. At the same time, the economy has remained strong as the FOMC has tightened monetary policy. Real gross domestic product has been growing at a solid pace. Consumer spending has been robust, and the housing sector appears to be continuing to rebound. The most recent employment report showed a labor market with solid job gains. The average pace of job gains over the past year has slowed somewhat and the labor force participation rate has also improved over the same time frame, a sign that labor market supply and demand may be coming into better balance. The banking system continues to be strong and resilient. Banks have tightened lending standards due to higher interest rates and funding costs and in anticipation of future regulatory requirements. Despite this tightening of bank lending standards, we have not seen signs of a sharp contraction in credit that would significantly slow economic activity. Though bank loan balance growth has slowed, the ongoing strong balance sheets of households and businesses combined with the growing importance of non-banks as sources of credit suggest that the effects of monetary policy on bank lending may have smaller effects on the economy than in the past. Given the mixed data releases—strong spending data but a decline in inflation and downward revisions to jobs created in previous months—I supported the FOMC's decision to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate. But I continue to expect that further rate hikes will likely be needed to return inflation to 2 percent in a timely way. The Summary of Economic Projections released in connection with the September FOMC meeting showed that the median participant expects inflation to stay above 2 percent at least until the end of 2025. This, along with my own expectation that progress on inflation is likely to be slow given the current level of monetary policy restraint, suggests that further policy tightening will be needed to bring inflation down in a sustainable and timely manner. It is important to reiterate that monetary policy is not on a pre-set course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions based on the incoming data and its implications for our economic outlook. We should remain willing to raise the federal funds rate at a future meeting if the incoming data indicates that progress on inflation has stalled or is too slow to bring inflation to 2 percent in a timely way. Returning inflation to our 2 percent goal is necessary to achieve a sustainably strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone. Turning to bank regulation and supervision, I would also like to briefly address bank regulatory policy. With the bank failures and accompanying banking system stress earlier this year, it was clear that the Federal Reserve, and in some cases the other federal banking agencies, need to address supervisory shortcomings and potentially consider revision of some failure-related bank regulations. In my view, any proposals considered by the Board and any others jointly proposed by the bank regulatory agencies should be It is absolutely imperative that stakeholders—including bankers—share their views with policymakers on regulatory reform proposals. All of the comments, data, and analysis enable policymakers to make informed decisions throughout the rulemaking and proposal process. Information about the intended and unintended impacts of these initiatives is especially informative. If the Fed and other banking agencies have not provided sufficient context, data, and analysis to satisfy stakeholder questions or concerns, commenters should provide that perspective as well. As you know, there are a number of regulatory rulemakings under consideration by the Board and the other bank regulatory agencies. Some have already been published for comment including the proposal to implement Basel III "endgame" by significantly expanding capital requirements and bringing the threshold for compliance down to include all banks over $100 billion in assets from only the largest GSIB banks, and the expansion of the long-term debt requirement from only the largest banks again to all banks over $100 billion in assets. Still other proposals have not yet been published or moved to the next stage of the rulemaking process, including the Community Reinvestment Act rulemaking, the further consideration of climate guidance, and others. The Board has also publicly indicated it may propose additional revisions in the future to Regulation II. I recognize that in some instances, multiple, interrelated proposals out for comment at the same time may complicate or even frustrate the ability to provide meaningful comment. Even so, I strongly encourage your participation to inform the rulemaking process. This audience is uniquely positioned to provide real-world feedback about the intended and unintended consequences of agency rulemakings. I look forward to all of the stakeholder comments and feedback throughout the current and upcoming regulatory rulemaking processes. I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Minorities in Banking Forum, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good afternoon! I am Governor Lisa D. Cook. And it is a privilege to be able to say a few words to close out this important forum, now in its eighth year.1I am disappointed I couldn't be with you in person. But I am glad to have this opportunity to say why I believe your discussion these past two days is so important to the goal of promoting a healthy economy that works for everyone. The Minorities in Banking Forum was started in 2016 by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City but is now supported by all of the Federal Reserve's regional Reserve Banks because of a recognition of its important mission, which is to nurture the professional development of bankers and help ensure that the leaders of banks are representative of the communities they serve. If I tried to define the word "community," I would start with trust—neighbors trusting neighbors and working together for the common good. Successful banks also depend on trust—customers who believe their money will be safe, that they will be treated fairly, and that those making loan decisions and advising them understand their needs and their hopes. It is the same trust that drives economic decisionmaking throughout our economy. Banks help build that trust when they are led by people who are truly representative of those they serve. The Fed created the forum with a few mutually beneficial goals in mind. First, leaders from middle management through the senior level would have an opportunity to come together in an environment focused on the industry and your own professional development. Secondly, we would do our best to connect you to the Federal Reserve and its work. And lastly, of particular importance to the Federal Reserve, this forum would help create and expand a pipeline and our network of diverse banking professionals. As we conclude this year's forum, I encourage each of you to continue the conversations from these last few days and carry forward the inspiration we've gained here. I encourage everyone to reach out to other participants. Strong networks of peers and mentors will offer both support and advice as you advance in your career. I challenge you to expand your network and engage with and support others to pursue careers with a sense of purpose and deep engagement with the communities you serve. Mentorship provides guidance and opportunities to the next generation of professionals. As you identify this kind of talent, I hope they will be joining you for next year's forum. Thank you and enjoy the rest of the day! 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve Board, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and state financial regulators, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Idalia on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found athttps://www.fema.gov/disasters. Lending:The agencies encouragefinancial institutions to work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Idalia. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas are supported by the agencies and should not be subject to examiner criticism. In accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, institutions should individually evaluate modifications of existing loans to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings or modifications to borrowers experiencing financial difficulty, as applicable. In making this evaluation, institutions should consider the facts and circumstances of each borrower and modification. In supervising institutions affected by Hurricane Idalia, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after Hurricane Idalia. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by Hurricane Idalia. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by Hurricane Idalia may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Idalia that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of Hurricane Idalia. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, refer to the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Institutions are encouraged to monitor municipal securities and loans affected by Hurricane Idalia. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by the disaster and encourage institutions to engage in appropriate monitoring and take prudent efforts to stabilize such investments. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.html FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision/letters-credit-unions-other-guidance/examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Resources: Hurricane Idalia
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by R. Dean Phillips Bank Trust Dated 11-19-2004, of Las Vegas, Nevada, and its subsidiary, HNB Bancorp, Inc., of Hannibal, Missouri, to acquire Northeast Missouri Bancshares, Inc., a bank holding company, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, The Mercantile Bank of Louisiana, Missouri, both of Louisiana, Missouri. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition order against Tanner WinterhofFormer employee of VisionBank of Iowa, Ames, IowaFalsification of bank documents Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Gardner Bancshares, Inc., Lenexa, Kansas and Small Business Bank, Lenexa, KansasCease and desist order, September 1, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the National Bureau of Economic Research Economics of Artificial Intelligence Conference, Fall 2023, Toronto, Canada IntroductionAs I was in 2018, I am excited to speak to you at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) artificial intelligence (AI) conference, in a city that is a world-class center of AI research and business start-ups, to discuss AI and its prospective effects on productivity and the labor market. Outside of those of us who have spent many years researching the economics of innovation, it seems that AI is having a moment. The surge in excitement and trepidation about AI is palpable. Google searches for "AI" have tripled worldwide since 2022, fueled by the buzz about ChatGPT. Of course, this group saw it coming as early as 2017, when the first NBER AI conference was held here in Toronto, and many of you saw it coming much earlier than that. I will focus my remarks on generative AI, which creates new content largely in response to natural language prompts.1As this audience knows, image and text classification—discriminative AI—has been in use for many years and is remarkably effective. I have used it to identify demographic characteristics of entrepreneurs in my own research.2In contrast, effective generative AI is a very recent development and seems to be a leap forward into something new. Applications of generative AI range from the prosaic, like reducing the monotony of writing routine memos, to the wonderous, like protein structure prediction and drug discovery. Of course, experts emphasize that at their core, all forms of AI are an exercise in prediction, and technically that is true.3To the layperson, though, a chatbot that is nearly good enough to pass the Turing test is substantially different from the U.S. Postal Service using AI to read your handwriting. Some of the uses of generative AI may be unsettling. For example, concerns about the ability of generative AI to impersonate individuals to harm their reputation or violate their privacy exist and are growing. Moreover, observers have noted that AI models sometimes harbor, if not amplify, the biases found in their training data, leading to malign effects on decisions about mortgage approvals, insurance rates, medical diagnoses, and even pretrial detention.4And discrimination is not just an equity issue—it also holds down economic growth, as I show in my own work.5 The range of potential social effects of AI is wide, as will be explored in the next presentation.6In general, I am optimistic about broad benefits accruing to the economy and society from the use of generative AI—including more productive and less tedious work in offices, labs, factories, and warehouses—provided we address the very real concerns I just mentioned, and others like them. As we consider how to foster the emerging benefits of AI and guard against unwelcome harms, it is important to keep in mind that the path from innovation to greater welfare passes through the choices of individuals in a social context—in the corner office, in government, and in the minds of workers and consumers—and progress could stall or accelerate in any of these places. I will return to this point later after offering some thoughts on the potential for AI to affect productivity and the labor market. Why do I focus on AI as a monetary policymaker? The Federal Reserve's dual mandate is to promote maximum employment and stable prices. When firms deploy technologies that make workers more productive, they create the conditions for greater wage growth consistent with stable prices. And the labor market adjustment that follows as the economy adapts to technical change can affect maximum employment. AI and ProductivityThe impact of AI on the economy and monetary policy will depend on whether AI is just another app or something more profound. The most consequential innovations in the past have been general purpose technologies that have broadly transformed the economy over an extended period of time. We are living through the ongoing transformation fueled by electronic information technology, for example, and electrification had a similar effect in the early 20th century. General purpose technologies have three key features: (1) they are widely used across the economy, (2) they improve steadily over a long period of time, and (3) they raise the productivity of research and development (R&D).7Could generative AI have these features? I will consider each in turn. First, is generative AI widely used? It is easy to see the potential, and we seem to be headed for widespread use. Generative AI makes communication more efficient, and nearly all human activities—and all industries—involve communication. It is true that if you let generative AI draft an email, write the minutes of a meeting, or research a topic, you will have to review, fact-check, and edit the result. Nonetheless, thanks to AI's contribution, you may be much closer to your goal when you start than if you began with a blank page. Empirical evidence is still patchy, but there is work showing that generative AI improves productivity in a variety of settings, including computer coding, customer service, language translation, and robotics.8 Second, will AI itself improve steadily over time? If we look backward, we can see that although the history of the computer language models at the core of generative AI goes back at least to the 1950s, there has been an explosion of technical progress in very recent years as LLMs, or large language models, using neural networks have emerged. Whether that explosive progress can be sustained is an open question, although the concerted efforts here in Toronto and elsewhere bode well for continued innovation. To draw an analogy, the sustained progress in solid-state electronics correctly predicted by Gordon Moore in 1965 looks like a law from a distance. But, in reality, each new generation of chip technology represents the coordinated effort of hundreds of scientists and engineers solving seemingly intractable problems.9Continuing advances in model architecture, data curation, and computation will be essential for the continual improvement of AI models and implementation. Third, does generative AI make R&D more productive? Some potential for efficiency improvements in the scientific process when it comes to literature review and writing is obvious. Yet AI can go much deeper, discovering patterns in data and in previous research to generate hypotheses for testing that may not have occurred to researchers. Work by Ludwig and Mullainathan on exactly this topic will be presented shortly. All told, generative AI seems promising as a general purpose technology. Of course, you will get a much deeper dive into this question later this morning with the Eloundou, Manning, Mishkin, and Rock presentation. In their work, they find that 80 percent of the U.S. workforce will see at least some of their tasks transformed by generative AI. The authors of that paper do not take a stand on how fast this transformation will take place. Nor will I. However, we do know that historically the journey from innovation to productivity has sometimes been a long and uneven one. An often-cited example is the electric dynamo, which was first used in the U.S. in the 1890s but did not boost manufacturing productivity until the 1920s.10Things now are a bit more hopeful than that example suggests, though: The lag between invention and adoption has been substantially reduced since the 19th century.11Adoption of generative AI is certainly happening at a rapid clip. Even so, the full benefit of a technology only follows adoption when suitable complementary investments have been made.12These can include changes in corporate structure and management practices, worker training, and the adjustment of the mix of capital in use. On the last point, we may have a head start, as AI will be deployed in a world with a massive stock of information technology already in place. New business formation will surely play a role as well, as historically much of productivity growth has followed from the entry of firms starting with a clean slate—and the exit of firms that were slow to adapt.13 Labor Market EffectsAs with all revolutionary technologies, when we turn our attention from productivity to the labor market, many express concern, focusing on jobs that may disappear, while others focus on which jobs will replace them. Economic history suggests cautious optimism here. When the world switched from horse-drawn transport to motor vehicles, jobs for stable hands disappeared, but jobs for auto mechanics took their place.14New technologies may displace some types of labor, but they can also raise the productivity and incomes of jobs they create or complement. The increase in consumption that follows may raise demand for labor overall. Nonetheless, the displacement effect might be concentrated and the productivity effect more diffuse. Therefore, while many workers throughout the economy benefit, a smaller set bear the brunt of the negative effects. Just as the introduction of computerized machine tools replaced skilled machinists and personal computers made many routine clerical and administrative jobs obsolete, the widespread adoption of AI will be a difficult transition for some workers.15 But the labor market effects of technological change are more subtle than just creating and eliminating positions. Labor economists encourage us to think of work in terms of tasks, not jobs.16As firms rethink their product lines and how they produce their goods and services in response to technical change, the composition of the tasks that need to be performed changes. Here, the portfolio of skills that workers have to offer is crucial. Can you shift to a new position that requires a different mix of your skills? For workers with a diverse skill set, and for workers with broad skills, like critical thinking and project management, the answer may well be "yes." For others, like the stable hand who was highly skilled in grooming horses, the answer may be "no."17 The ability of workers to move to where they are needed as the task composition of production changes will also be an important determinant of how successfully the economy adapts to the new jobs created in response to AI. For example, how quickly will education and training react to the market signals of the skills that are needed? How will AI affect the range of skills required within firms and how will firms restructure in response? And how efficiently will the labor market match job seekers to suitable vacancies? While the Federal Reserve does not have a role in setting policies to help workers directly, I do not want to suggest that this transition will be easy or painless. Any large change in the labor force will generate disruptions and challenges that will need to be addressed to help workers adapt and thrive. The benefit of AI to society as a whole will depend on the adaptability of workers' skills, how well they are retrained or redeployed, and how policymakers choose to support the groups that are hardest hit by these changes. Choice BehaviorThe potential for far-reaching changes to the economy from generative AI is clear, but the pace and extent of the changes will depend on the choices made by workers, managers, and policymakers. AI makes predictions, but AI does not make choices. Ultimately, human beings are still in control. For workers, preparing for the AI-enhanced economy is a tricky task. What should students focus on in school? What college and university courses should be developed and mandatory? What kinds of continuing education are needed? It is safe to say that generative AI will make knowledge work more efficient—a worker can do more research, communication, design, and the like in a day. And, while some observers might warn that means fewer such workers, it is more likely we will need more of them. After all, when knowledge workers can accomplish more in an hour, firms have an incentive to use more of them, not fewer. So the demand for STEM skills will be robust, as it has been throughout the information age, but AI technology may strengthen the rising demand for social skills as well.18Some of the job titles will be brand new. A search for "generative AI" jobs on Indeed.com early this week found over 2,000 listings, including such titles as "prompt engineer" and "newsroom generative AI lead." Among firms, success deploying AI will depend on strategic decisions, such as investing in training, reorganization, and product development. Financing will need to be available to existing firms that appear to best leverage the potential of AI and to the innovative new firms that will surely appear with AI-based business models. Policymakers, too, at all levels of government, will have to confront the changing world. Importantly, in the policy arena—as well as health care, consumer finance, insurance, and many others—decisionmakers have legal and ethical duties to be deliberate about the effects their choices have on affected groups. In this context, an AI black box with no insight into the decision-making process is of limited value. As a policymaker, I look upon model-generated forecasts with a skeptical eye, if they are not coupled with a plausible explanation for the driving factors behind them. More generally, when stakeholders have an opportunity to appeal a decision, they are entitled to understand how the decision was made—an issue I emphasized when I spoke at the 2018 meeting of this group.19So I am particularly interested in seeing progress on "explainable AI," which may help bridge the divide between the technical sphere and the user.20 In short, the impact of generative AI, as with all technical change, has to be understood in terms of human choice behavior in specific social and institutional contexts. Generative AI will change the choice set available to consumers, firms, and policymakers. As it happens, because economists study choice behavior, we are well positioned to contribute to the debate about AI and welfare and to anticipate the trajectory of this exciting trend. Some questions you might consider include: Are there ways to limit the labor-force disruptions of AI while capturing its job-creating potential? What new training and skill development will be needed to capture AI's benefits? Can productivity measures be improved to better capture how quickly AI is affecting the economy? I am delighted that this group continues to produce valuable, insightful work on these and other questions on the economics of AI, including the many interesting, thoughtful papers to be presented today. Thank you. 1. The views I express here are my own and not those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Lisa D. Cook, Matt Marx, and Emmanuel Yimfor (2022), "Funding Black High-Growth Startups," NBER Working Paper Series 30682 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November).Return to text 3. On AI as prediction, see Ajay Agrawal, Joshua S. Gans, and Avi Goldfarb (2019), "Artificial Intelligence: The Ambiguous Labor Market Impact of Automating Prediction,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 33 (Spring), pp. 31–50.Return to text 4. On criminal justice, see Laurel Eckhouse, Kristian Lum, Cynthia Conti-Cook, and Julie Ciccolini (2019), "Layers of Bias: A Unified Approach for Understanding Problems with Risk Assessment,"Criminal Justice and Behavior,vol. 46 (February), pp. 185–209. For a broader discussion of bias mitigation in AI, see Xavier Ferrer, Tom van Nuenen, Jose M. Such, Mark Coté, and Natalia Criado (2021), "Bias and Discrimination in AI: A Cross-Disciplinary Perspective,"IEEE Technology and Society Magazine,vol. 40 (June), pp. 72–80.Return to text 5. See Lisa D. Cook, Janet Gerson, and Jennifer Kuan (2022), "Closing the Innovation Gap in Pink and Black,"Entrepreneurship and Innovation Policy and the Economy,vol. 1, pp. 43–66.Return to text 6. See Charles I. Jones (2023), "The A.I. Dilemma: Growth versus Existential Risk," working paper, September 12.Return to text 7. For the definition of general purpose technology, see Boyan Jovanovic and Peter L. Rousseau (2005), "General Purpose Technologies," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds.,Handbook of Economic Growth,vol. 1B (Amsterdam: Elsevier), pp. 1181–224.Return to text 8. Empirical papers providing evidence of the effectiveness of generative AI span a variety of tasks, including financial services, computer programming, call centers, and writing. For financial services, see Tracy Yang, Tian Lu, Beibei Li, and Lu Xianghua (2020), "Personalizing Debt Collections: Combining Reinforcement Learning and Field Experiment," ICIS 2020 Proceedings, December 14. For computer programming, see Sida Peng, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer (2023), "The Impact of AI on Developer Productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot (PDF)," unpublished paper, Cornell University, arXiv, February. For call centers, see Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsay R. Raymond (2023), "Generative AI at Work," NBER Working Paper Series 31161 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April). For writing, see Shakked Noy and Whitney Zhang (2023), "Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Effects of Generative Artificial Intelligence," working paper, March 10; Emma van Inwegen, Zanele T. Munyikwa, and John J. Horton (2023), "Algorithmic Writing Assistance on Jobseekers' Resumes Increases Hires," NBER Working Paper Series 30886 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January).Return to text 9. See Hassan N. Khan, David A. Hounshell, and Erica R.H. Fuchs (2018), "Science and Research Policy at the End of Moore's Law,"Nature Electronics,vol. 1 (January), pp. 14–21. Moore's initial prediction was later revised to state that the number of components on a cost-effective integrated circuit would double every two years. See Gordon E. Moore (1965), "Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits,"Electronics,vol. 38(8), pp. 114–17; Gordon E. Moore (1975), "Progress in Digital Integrated Electronics," Technical Digest 1975, International Electron Devices Meeting, IEEE, pp. 11–13.Return to text 10. See Paul A. David (1990), "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox,"American Economic Review,vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61.Return to text 11. See Diego Comin, Danial Lashkari, and Martí Mestieri (2021), "Structural Change with Long‐Run Income and Price Effects,"Econometrica,vol. 89 (January), pp. 311–74.Return to text 12. See Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (2021), "The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 13 (January), pp. 333–72.Return to text 13. See Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24.Return to text 14. See Georgios Petropoulos (2018), "The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Employment," in Max Neufeind, Jacqueline O'Reilly, and Florian Ranft, eds.,Work in the Digital Age(London: Rowman & Littlefield International), pp. 119–32.Return to text 15. See Leah Platt Boustan, Jiwon Choi, and David Clingingsmith (2022), "Automation after the Assembly Line: Computerized Machine Tools, Employment and Productivity in the United States (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 30400 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August; revised October); David H. Autor and David Dorn (2013), "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor Market,"American Economic Review,vol. 103 (August), pp. 1553–97.Return to text 16. See David H. Autor, Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003), "The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (November), pp. 1279–333; Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo (2018), "The Race between Man and Machine: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment,"American Economic Review,vol. 108 (June), pp. 1488–542.Return to text 17. On the difficulty faced by workers with eliminated jobs, see David Hummels, Jakob R. Munch, Lars Skipper, and Chong Xiang (2012), "Offshoring, Transition, and Training: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data,"American Economic Review,vol. 102 (May), pp. 424–28.Return to text 18. See David J. Deming (2017), "The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 132 (November), pp. 1593–640.Return to text 19. See Lisa Cook (2018), "The Consequences of AI-Based Decisions or Outsourcing Tasks When Humans Fail," presented at the NBER Economics of Artificial Intelligence Conference 2018, Toronto, September 13–14.Return to text 20. See Pantelis Linardatos, Vasilis Papastefanopoulos, and Sotiris Kotsiantis (2021), "Explainable AI: A Review of Machine Learning Interpretability Methods,"Entropy,23, 18.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell swears in Lisa D. Cook on September 13, 2023, for her second term as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Click here for more high-resolution photos. Dr. Lisa D. Cook was sworn in for her second term as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on Wednesday. The oath was administered by Chair Jerome H. Powell in the press briefing room of the Board's Martin building. President Biden renominated Dr. Cook for a full term on May 12, 2023, and she was reconfirmed by the United States Senate on September 6, 2023. Her term as a member of the Board ends on January 31, 2038. A biography of each Board member is available on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Lisa D. Cook's biography
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2023 Symposium on Indigenous Inclusion, The Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion and The Reserve Bank of New Zealand—Te Pūtea Matua, Auckland, New Zealand Governor Bowman was asked to make remarks responding to two questions. Below are the questions and her responses. Panel Question 1: Why should Indigenous financial inclusion be a core focus for central banks? I'd like to thank the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and Governor Orr for hosting this symposium and for the invitation to participate.1 It is an honor to join my Network colleagues for this important discussion. As the Federal Reserve Board's representative to the Network, I recognize and acknowledge that the United States and the foundation of its economy were built on land enriched by its original Indigenous inhabitants and their stewardship of its natural resources. Recent natural disasters affecting Indigenous communities in Network countries highlight the importance of our work. Those harmed by the recent wildfires in Hawaii and Canada, as well as Cyclone Gabrielle here in New Zealand, face substantial economic headwinds. I hold these communities close in my thoughts. I see two fundamental reasons why central banks should focus on Indigenous financial inclusion. The first is our responsibility to foster an economy that works for everyone. Second is the wisdom we can gain from community-led approaches to expanding financial opportunity. In order to effectively support inclusive economic growth, we need to understand the economic conditions of Indigenous communities. The Federal Reserve's ongoing research and outreach enable us to gain insight about economic barriers that Indigenous communities face. Our recent research notes several challenges, including those related to labor market conditions, affordable credit and financial services access, homeownership, and broadband access. Our efforts to understand these challenges support our ability to provide information and resources that can help address the needs. For example, our research has found that Indigenous communities have less access to high-speed internet. During the pandemic, Indigenous communities participated less in remote work—which may, in part, reflect this lack of access. In addition to our research, we will convene a conversation among Indigenous communities, federal policymakers, and researchers to discuss the challenges and opportunities to advance broadband service networks. Our research has also shown that on average, Indigenous borrowers pay more for home loans. While there is a diversity of housing conditions, land tenure, and very different legal frameworks governing lending and other financial services for Indigenous communities, our research helps raise awareness of the challenges and informs our work to promote Indigenous homeownership. Our research has also found that the lack of credit and financial services access is a key barrier to economic development in Indigenous communities. Native Community Development Financial Institutions—or CDFIs—play a vital role in addressing this credit and financial services gap. The Federal Reserve's research and engagement efforts have significantly advanced our understanding of the economic barriers for Indigenous communities, but there is still much to learn. The Center for Indian Country Development is working to address data gaps of U.S. Indigenous populations to provide needed information to their leaders, policymakers, and practitioners to inform decisions that best serve their communities. The Center has developed datasets on Indigenous community labor market conditions, reservation profiles including key demographic and economic indicators, and a tool that identifies economic development resources and opportunities in these communities. The Center is currently developing a Native Entity Enterprise Dataset to better understand businesses owned by Alaska Native corporations, Native Hawaiian organizations, and tribes. In addition to identifying economic needs, these datasets can help policymakers direct resources where they will be most effective. Above all, these datasets equip Indigenous communities with information to plan their economic futures. Financial inclusion is an important focus for central banks, and Indigenous-led approaches can help further efforts to achieve an inclusive economy. Native CDFIs serve as critical sources of credit and financial services for Indigenous communities, and their unique lending practices provide new insights about strategies to reduce loan delinquency risks. Like community banks, Native CDFIs take a holistic approach to assessing credit risk, which includes conventional measures like credit scores and community- and character-based criteria that leverage their understanding of their communities and customers. In a recent study of Native CDFI loan data, we found that these customer relationships can reduce uncertainty in lending outcomes. These research findings could be useful for other financial institutions serving Indigenous communities. The Fed has also increased Indigenous participation on boards and advisory councils and has hired staff to engage with these communities. We are working to ensure that Indigenous perspectives inform our work and create new opportunities to learn from their practices and approaches. Thank you for the opportunity to reflect on this important area of focus for central banks. I look forward to hearing from my colleagues on this topic. Panel Question 2: What two or three key actions taken by your organization have been instrumental in accelerating progress towards Indigenous financial inclusion? In recent years, the Federal Reserve has improved efforts to focus on Indigenous communities, including convening listening sessions and outreach events, conducting research in partnership with these communities, supporting economic and financial education, and offering programs that build the capacity of Indigenous organizations. Our Reserve Banks lead these efforts, and our involvement in the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion broadens our perspective as we engage in this work. We are accelerating progress in three ways: The first is engagement. Our work to advance Indigenous financial inclusion requires that Indigenous communities value the Fed as a trusted partner and resource. Throughout the System, we are engaging these communities through outreach events, including listening sessions and tribal leader roundtables to discuss economic issues—from housing to early childcare, and from education to business. One of these engagements, an affordable housing forum in Hawaii, led to financing discussions for housing projects that will benefit Native Hawaiian communities. Another facilitated a small business lending working group that regularly convenes local, state, and federal partners to address challenges with access to capital for Alaskan small businesses, especially those owned by Native Alaskans. This group has helped connect local Native CDFIs to banks and state and federal partners for funding and technical assistance. We also recently partnered with national Indigenous organizations to host a webinar featuring new research on the opportunity for Indigenous business entities to engage in federal contracting. The event brought together a range of Indigenous enterprise executives who reflected on research, discussed challenges and opportunities for Indigenous entities pursuing federal contracting, and shared their own stories of economic diversification. Conversations like this support our Indigenous partners—by allowing us to share our research insights and by providing a forum for Indigenous community members to share their own stories and perspectives. The second way we are making progress is research. We are conducting research for and with Indigenous communities. Accurate, comprehensive information on Indigenous economic conditions helps to identify challenges and opportunities, providing data to inform decisionmaking. The Federal Reserve's Small Business Credit Survey gathers information to help policymakers understand changes in small business credit practices. The survey now includes Indigenous small business owners, which improves our understanding of their conditions and needs. We also conduct a recurring survey of CDFIs, including Native CDFIs, to understand their current challenges and opportunities. We continue to conduct research in consultation with Indigenous-led organizations and tribal governments. Our research is conducted in accordance with data principles recognizing the important responsibilities associated with collecting and analyzing Indigenous data to ensure that Indigenous data sovereignty and governance are respected. The third, and perhaps most important, is empowerment. Our research and programs enable our Reserve Banks to assist Indigenous communities through information and resources to plan their own economic futures. For example, our Native Economic and Financial Education Empowerment program works with Indigenous communities to provide free economic and personal finance education that incorporates Indigenous language and culture. Our Working Communities Challenge facilitates local collaboration to increase economic opportunity in rural areas. This program serves as a first-of-its-kind venue to connect tribal leaders, nonprofit organizations, and private- and public-sector leaders around economic development efforts. Most recently, leaders convened to understand data gaps across the full partnership and how they can better leverage data across organizations as they work toward expanding the number of living-wage jobs and reducing rates of childhood poverty within the community. Indigenous voices and perspectives are a critical part of this effort. We're also developing new data tools and research partnerships that help Indigenous communities conduct research on economic opportunities. For example, our Native American Funding and Finance Atlas is a publicly available interactive map tool that identifies the financial institutions, lending activity, and economic development programs in their tribal community and surrounding areas. I'm proud of the Federal Reserve System's efforts to further Indigenous financial inclusion, and I'm grateful for this opportunity to learn from the dedicated efforts of our Network partners. There is so much important and impactful work happening, and I look forward to the progress that we will continue to make together. Thank you. 1. The views here expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or at the Reserve Banks.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell swears in Philip N. Jefferson on September 13, 2023, as Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Click here for more high-resolution photos. Dr. Philip N. Jefferson took the oath of office as Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on Wednesday. Vice Chair Jefferson's oath was administered by Chair Powell in the press briefing room of the Board's Martin building. President Biden nominated Dr. Jefferson on May 12, 2023, and he was confirmed by the United States Senate on September 6, 2023. His term as Vice Chair ends on September 7, 2027, and his term as a Board member ends on January 31, 2036. A biography of each Board member is available on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Philip N. Jefferson's biography
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Seventh Annual Fintech Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, in the midst of a wave of innovation in the payments system. There are a range of important players in the payments system and the Federal Reserve has important roles as a supervisor as well as a payments operator. Regardless of who is providing the service, our payments system needs to meet fundamental principles. Among those core principles is ensuring that the payments infrastructure supports broad access and promotes financial inclusion. Payments are essential for everyday life, and too often, low- and moderate-income households and small businesses don't have access to the payments services they need at a reasonable cost. Moreover, as the payments system evolves, it needs to provide strong consumer protections. The payments system needs to welcome competition, provide consumers with choices, and support innovation. The payments system should empower consumers to have better control over their financial lives, including their identity and financial data. And more broadly, our payments system should promote efficiency, convenience, speed, low cost, resiliency, privacy, and security. Finally, our payments system must and does rely on trust, and this trust must be maintained as the system is updated. This includes trust that the payments system is not used for illicit purposes, that lawful payments will always be honored, and that neither the government nor private actors will act improperly based on use of the payments infrastructure. Not that long ago, the Federal Reserve was facilitating payments by moving bundles of checks around the country on trucks and trains! And we still have important work to do to ensure that those who rely on checks can get their funds in a timely way and that the system is not exposed to fraud. But more recently the focus has been on improving our electronic payments infrastructure. The Fed has long operated the Fedwire Funds Service, used by banks to conduct large-value, same-day transactions among themselves. In addition, the automated clearinghouse (ACH) service supports batch payments of more modest value. While the Fedwire Funds Service and ACH transactions have served the economy well for decades, the economy has changed dramatically over that time. There is a demand for faster payments, and the Fed has recognized that today's households and businesses would benefit from ready availability of funds 24x7. So, in July, the Fed launched the FedNow Service®, a new service to make instant payments secure and convenient. FedNow enables instant payments to be processed on any day of the year for a broad array of transactions. The FedNow Service is core payments infrastructure available to all depository institutions, including large banks, regional banks, community banks, and credit unions. It is those institutions that will determine whether real-time payments are available to everyone. We have provided the rails. Innovation by private depository institutions will determine whether these services reach a broad range of households and businesses. While current volumes on FedNow are small, I expect that participation will grow over time and be a significant addition to, and advance on, the existing payments infrastructure. I view the FedNow Service as complementary to the private sector instant payments services offered today, and as banks build on these rails, customers can get better service. Individuals could have instant access to their paychecks and be able to spend them same day, rather than waiting several days for checks to process. Or consumers could pay bills at the last minute on the due date, potentially avoiding late fees. And small businesses would benefit from timely payment as well. The benefits could be far-reaching and will be especially significant for low- and moderate-income households. Banks and their service providers are already thinking creatively about how they can leverage these new payments rails to meet customer needs for immediate funds availability. Efforts by banks to meet the demands of their customers will support more robust offerings, and I look forward to engaging with banks about how they could be advancing financial inclusion objectives with faster payments services. Separately, we are engaged in efforts to understand the next generation of payments technology and how it can be used to support a secure and efficient payments system. As the pace of innovation increases, the payments landscape continues to evolve with the emergence of new programmable payments platforms, including those built on distributed ledger technology and blockchain technology, and new forms of digital assets, such as cryptocurrencies, stablecoins, and central bank digital currencies (CBDCs). Given the new capabilities they could enable, we are seeing increased interest in and experimentation with these innovative technologies. This experimentation is happening in the private and public sectors, both domestically and internationally. In my view, as both the issuer of U.S. currency and an operator in the payments system, the Federal Reserve must understand these developments and the tradeoffs they introduce. Our engagement with innovation is crucial so that we can continue to support a safe and efficient payments system into the future. We continue to speak to a broad range of stakeholders and conduct basic research in emerging technologies that might support a CBDC payments backbone, or for other purposes in the existing payments system. For example, the Fed's CBDC research program is currently focused on system architecture, notably how ledgers that record ownership of and transactions in digital assets are maintained, secured, and verified, as well as tokenization models—that is, the design of the digital analog to the paper bank note that permits a transfer of value between two parties without direct facilitation by the issuing central bank. Of course, investigation and research are very different from decision making about next steps in terms of payments system development, and we are a long way from that. The Federal Reserve has made no decision on issuing a CBDC and would only proceed with the issuance of a CBDC with clear support from the executive branch and authorizing legislation from Congress. Given the importance of this infrastructure, investigating the potential opportunities, risks, and tradeoffs for payments innovation is just one way the Fed fulfills its role in supporting the responsible innovation that enables a safe and efficient U.S. payments system. Now let me turn my attention to recent actions by the Federal Reserve that are aimed at promoting responsible innovation in financial services more broadly. Last month, the Federal Reserve announced that it has created a novel activities supervision program to focus on the supervision of risks posed by novel, technology-driven activities at banks.1At present, these activities include those involving crypto-assets, distributed ledger technology, and complex technology-driven bank partnerships with nonbank fintechs. That said, this program will grow as new technologies emerge. By dedicating a team of supervisory experts to the oversight of novel, technology-driven activities, our aim is to provide clarity as well as timely and relevant feedback to the institutions we supervise. We want them to continue to work to take advantage of innovations, while also supporting their ongoing safety and soundness. One innovation that crosses both payments provision and bank safety and soundness issues is stablecoins, which can also be described as digital tokens that aim to maintain a stable value relative to a government-issued currency, such as the U.S. dollar. When an asset is pegged to a government-issued currency, it is a form of private money. When that asset is also used as a means of payment and a store of value, it borrows the trust of the central bank. So, the Federal Reserve has a strong interest in ensuring that any stablecoin offerings operate within an appropriate federal prudential oversight framework, so they do not threaten financial stability or payments system integrity. To provide clarity for banks interested in engaging with these assets, we recently issued guidance on the process by which a Fed-supervised bank can seek to obtain a supervisory non-objection before issuing, holding, or transacting in "dollar tokens."2As the Board of Governors announced in January, before those banks engage in these activities, they are advised to obtain a written supervisory non-objection from the Fed verifying that they have appropriate risk management and systems in place to identify and control potential risks, such as those related to cybersecurity and compliance with anti-money-laundering laws.3 The guidance only covers the activities of the banks over which we have supervisory authority. But there are big risks when the Federal Reserve does not have direct supervisory and regulatory authority. I remain deeply concerned about stablecoin issuance without strong federal oversight. As I mentioned earlier, stablecoins are a form of money, and the ultimate source of credibility in money is the central bank. If non-federally regulated stablecoins were to become a widespread means of payment and store of value, they could pose significant risks to financial stability, monetary policy, and the U.S. payments system. It is important to get the legislative and regulatory framework right before significant risks emerge. We appreciate the work Congress has been doing on this important issue and look forward to further engagement to ensure that there is a robust federal framework for all stablecoins. As everyone in this room knows, innovation never stops. We are continuing to explore new technologies so we can continue to support a robust payments system that meets the needs of the public. We are committed to supporting responsible innovation, both through our provision of payments rails and through timely and relevant supervisory feedback to the institutions we supervise. Looking ahead, we will continue to engage in exploring new technologies, including those that could be used to further advance our provision of payments rails. As I mentioned, this work involves continuing to study the next generation of ledger technology. In conclusion, I want to applaud the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia for supporting the stakeholders coming together at these conferences, giving us opportunities to learn from each other as we engage in this important work. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Federal Reserve Board Provides Additional Information on Its Program to Supervise Novel Activities in the Banks It Oversees,"press release, August 8, 2023.Return to text 2. Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Board Provides Additional Information on Its Program."Return to text 3. This requirement is consistent with the supervisory nonobjection requirement applicable to national banks pursuant to interpretive letters issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. (SeeOCC Interpretive Letter No. 1174 (January 4, 2021) and OCC Interpretive Letter No. 1179 (November 18, 2021).)Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. (and by webcast) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you, Sarah, thank you to those in Fed Education who helped put together this event, and thank you to the teachers here and online who have put aside some of their planning time to listen and, I hope, also participate. If I were doing the grading, credit would always be granted for participation. We have scheduled this discussion with teachers well into the school year, partly to highlight the beginning, on October 1, of Economic Education Month. At the Fed, every month is Economic Education Month, and we are glad to join in the celebration. It is, fortunately, a very different time for teachers than the one we faced in August 2021, the last time we held this discussion with educators. In the crisis of the pandemic, teachers were on the front lines. I know how overwhelming this challenge was for many of you, and the extent of your sacrifice, for which I thank you. And the crisis in many ways continues, as research confirms the educational deficits that students still suffer from the pandemic. In addition to the challenges they face, there are likely to be consequences for the economy and for society, in a generation of young people who may lack some of what they need to be well-informed and engaged participants in our economy and our democracy. Addressing this legacy of the pandemic is a major public policy challenge, so now more than ever, teachers are crucial to America's future. A large majority of you are economic educators, a role that is of particular importance. As many of you know, the Fed's ability to influence the economy depends to some extent on influencing the public's view of current and future economic conditions. When my colleagues and I publish our projections for the most likely path for the economy and interest rates, as we did a couple of weeks ago, one of our goals is to influence spending and investment decisions today and in the months ahead. That will only be the case if people understand what we are saying and what it means for their own finances. That's where you come in. By educating students about economics, not only are you providing them with valuable skills to manage their finances, and to improve their chances for future success in any number of occupations that draw on economic thinking. You are also giving them the knowledge that they need to understand the macroeconomy, including the implications of decisions that the Fed makes. Economic educators impart knowledge that is instrumental in how the Federal Reserve promotes a healthy economy. In a way, when you are teaching students, you are also conducting monetary policy. But you do a lot more than that. Teachers illuminate the world for us. They help us to see the limitless possibilities in life, and as much as that, also in ourselves. At a wonderful but also very vulnerable time in each of our lives, teachers like you are there to help us understand the world, especially when it is hard to understand. I will leave you with one of the many examples I could cite from my time in school. I can clearly recall one November day, in fifth grade, at Blessed Sacrament School here in Washington, D.C. My teacher Mrs. Keller was called away from class. I adored Mrs. Keller, and when she returned to the room, I think every student was as upset as I was to see her tear-streaked face. And then we got the news—President John F. Kennedy had been shot and killed in Dallas. This was something that was very hard for my classmates and me to understand, but Mrs. Keller pulled herself together and convinced us that, somehow, everything was going to be all right. Teachers are there for all of us, when we need your knowledge, your example, your encouragement, and your care. Thank you for playing the indispensable role you do in our lives, and in our children's lives. And now, I would be very happy to respond to your questions.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the FedCommunities event "Keys to Opportunity in the Housing Market: Research on Strategies for Preserving and Expanding Rental Housing Affordability," Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Welcome, and thank you for joining us for the Federal Reserve's Community Development Research seminar series. This series enables the sharing of important research on economic conditions and opportunities in lower-income communities. We believe that conducting research to better understand these topics is an important way to further the goal of promoting an inclusive U.S. economy. The theme of this year's seminar is "Keys to Opportunity in the U.S. Housing Market." Today's event is hosted by the Board of Governors and the Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, and will focus on the affordability of rental housing and exploring potential strategies to address this important issue. We know that high-quality research can help us understand and address challenging issues, so I appreciate that we are joined by researchers and practitioners to discuss their work on this important topic. Individual economic well-being and financial stability are often associated with access to stable, affordable housing. Those at the lower end of the income spectrum tend to face the most acute hardships. We often find that renters face housing affordability challenges, in part because renters typically have lower incomes than homeowners. In addition, the median renter also tends to pay substantially more for housing as a percent of their income than many homeowners. As a result, they tend to have less room in their budgets for discretionary expenses, potentially leaving them more vulnerable to income disruptions or unexpected expenses. The most vulnerable populations faced significant risks going into the pandemic, but public policy interventions mitigated many of these risks. Some of these policies will be discussed today. The job losses experienced during the pandemic and other economic disruptions exacerbated concerns about ongoing rent affordability and delinquency, but fortunately, those did not materialize. Looking back, and with the goal of informing future policymakers facing similar circumstances, the pandemic experience provides a unique opportunity for housing researchers to gain valuable insight into the utility and efficiency of different policy actions. Which programs were most effective in supporting renters throughout this period? Were some more cost-effective than others? What are their lasting impacts on rental markets from these policies and protections? Are the lessons from the pandemic unique to that experience? Our first panel will offer insights into these questions as we think about how to prepare for future economic conditions. More recently, renters and their families have struggled with inflation. Rents also grew rapidly as we emerged from the pandemic. While rent inflation has eased, prices for renters seeking new leases grew by 18 percent in 2021 compared to 2 percent in 2019. This price growth has strained renters' budgets. A common way to measure whether renters are cost burdened is whether they pay 30 percent or more of their income on rent. While wages have also risen during this time, in 2021, the percent of renters facing increasing cost burdens rose to 49 percent, up from 46 percent in 2019. These increased cost pressures underscore the importance of the Federal Reserve's efforts to fight inflation, which can complement efforts to address other factors affecting rent prices, including increasing the supply of rental housing. The rate of rent increases has come down from the extremes of 2021 as units built during the pandemic-era construction boom have begun to hit the market. However, the most recent data show that new lease prices remain more than 20 percent higher than they were before the pandemic. This means that the average renter signing a new lease in 2023 will pay over$200 moreper month on rent than they would have in 2019. For single-family rental properties, the average listing costs even more, around$300 moreper month on average for a new lease today as compared to just before the pandemic. These rent increases can be particularly challenging, given that renters have long faced difficulty with rent affordability. As of May, 65 percent of lower-income renters found it difficult to meet usual household expenses, 6 percentage points higher than in March but below peak levels from the summer of 2022. According to the Board's 2022 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, 17 percent of renters were behind on their rent in the prior year, up from 10 percent in 2019. I look forward to learning more from the panelists and their research and experiences to understand how public policy can best address these issues. In our second panel, we will learn about promising approaches to address longer-term rental affordability issues. For example, how do state and local land-use regulations impact the availability of low-cost housing? How would novel approaches to housing development increase supply and longevity of affordable units? Should practitioners consider more comprehensive programs that include workforce development and financial literacy to help renters and their families achieve economic stability? Access to stable, affordable housing is critical for economic well-being, and it provides an important foundation for an individual to fully participate in the economy. I hope that today's discussion is valuable for all our panelists and participants. I am excited that we are able to facilitate an ongoing dialogue among this distinguished group of researchers and practitioners to share information and discuss policy challenges related to affordable rental housing. I hope that these conversations can lead to identifying evidence-based solutions to meet the demand for affordable housing that is so crucial in maintaining vibrant communities. Thank you for joining us.