The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Federal Reserve Board today invited public comment on proposed guidance to help certain large bank holding companies further develop their Dodd-Frank Act Title I resolution plans. These resolution plans, also known as "living wills," describe a bank holding company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. The guidance would generally apply to bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations with more than $250 billion in total assets but that are not the largest and most complex companies, which are already subject to guidance on resolution planning. The guidance would address the specific characteristics of, and risks posed by, this group of companies. The guidance is organized around key areas of potential vulnerability, such as capital, liquidity, and operational capabilities that could be needed in resolution. Distinct from the guidance to the largest and most complex companies, the proposal would provide agency expectations for both single point of entry and multiple point of entry strategy needs, which are different strategies companies may adopt for their rapid and orderly resolution. It also would propose that foreign banking organizations develop their U.S. resolution strategies to be complementary to their global resolution plans. The proposed guidance will be published in theFederal Register, with comments due by November 30, 2023. Board Memo (PDF) Fact Sheet (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Guidance for Resolution Plan Submissions of Domestic Triennial Full Filers Comments:Submit|View Federal Registernotice: Guidance for Resolution Plan Submissions of Foreign Triennial Full Filers Comments:Submit|View Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman
Federal bank regulatory agencies today requested comment on a proposal that would require large banks with total assets of $100 billion or more to maintain a layer of long-term debt, which would improve financial stability by increasing the resolvability and resiliency of such institutions. This proposal follows an advance notice of proposed rulemaking issued in October 2022 by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that looked at several possible changes, including a long-term debt requirement to promote more orderly resolutions for large banks. The recent failures of three large banks have underscored the importance of supplementary, loss absorbing resources that regulators can use to resolve banks in a way that reduces costs and risk of disruption to the banking system. By requiring each large bank to maintain a minimum amount of long-term debt to absorb losses, the proposal would increase the options available to resolve such banks in case of failure. Additionally, by reducing the risk that uninsured depositors would face losses, long-term debt can reduce the speed and severity of bank runs, and limit the risk of contagion when a bank is under stress. This proposal is designed to address the risks specific to large banks that are not global systemically important banks (GSIBs) and would not materially change the existing requirements already in place for GSIBs. Additionally, the proposal would prohibit large banks from engaging in certain activities that could complicate their resolution and would disincentivize these banks from holding long-term debt issued by other banks to reduce interconnectedness and contagion in the banking system. The proposal would provide a three-year phase-in period and would also allow certain outstanding long-term debt to count toward the minimum requirements to provide banks with a reasonable period to transition to the required characteristics of eligible long-term debt instruments. Comments on the proposal are due by November 30, 2023. Board Memo (PDF) Fact Sheet (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Long-term Debt Requirements for Large Bank Holding Companies, Certain Intermediate Holding Companies of Foreign Banking Organizations, and Large Insured Depository Institutions Comments:Submit|View Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman Statement by Governor Christopher J. Waller
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2023 CEO and Senior Management Summit and Annual Meeting, sponsored by the Kansas Bankers Association, Colorado Springs, Colorado Thank you for the invitation to join you again this year.1As a former Kansas banker, it is always great to be with Kansas bankers. I look forward to opportunities to learn about and discuss the issues affecting financial institutions and your communities, from supervision and regulation to how you and you customers are navigating the current economic and financial environment. Before we turn to our conversation, I'll offer a few thoughts on the economy and monetary policy. As you likely know, at our most recent meeting in July, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points—to a range of 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent—and we continue to reduce the Fed's securities holdings. Since March 2022, the FOMC has been tightening monetary policy as part of our ongoing effort to lower unacceptably high inflation. Since then, we have seen some progress, and inflation has declined from last year's very high level. Most recently, after more than six months of stubbornly high readings, the June consumer price index showed lower core inflation, a measure that excludes food and energy prices. While this development is a positive sign that monetary policy is contributing to lower inflation, both total and core inflation remain well above our 2 percent target. At the same time, the economy and the labor market have remained strong as the FOMC has tightened monetary policy. Real gross domestic product grew slightly more than 2 percent at an annual rate in the first half of the year, well above many forecasters' expectations. Consumer spending has been robust, and the housing sector appears to be rebounding with accelerating growth in house prices and a pickup in new housing starts. The most recent employment report showed a strong labor market with low unemployment and solid job gains. The pace of job gains has slowed, which is a sign that labor market demand and supply are coming into better balance. But the demand for workers continues to exceed the supply of available job seekers, adding upward pressure on prices. The banking system continues to be strong and resilient. While banks have tightened lending standards in response to higher interest rates and funding costs, there have not been signs of a further sharp contraction in credit from the stress earlier this year that would slow economic activity. Though loan balance growth has slowed, banks have continued to increase lending to households and businesses. Given the strong economic data and still elevated inflation, I supported the FOMC's decision in July to further increase the target range for the federal funds rate. I also expect that additional rate increases will likely be needed to get inflation on a path down to the FOMC's 2 percent target. The recent lower inflation reading was positive, but I will be looking for consistent evidence that inflation is on a meaningful path down toward our 2 percent goal as I consider further rate increases and how long the federal funds rate will need to remain at a restrictive level. I will also be watching for signs of slowing in consumer spending and signs that labor market conditions are loosening. It's important to reiterate that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions based on the incoming data and its implications for the economic outlook. We should remain willing to raise the federal funds rate at a future meeting if the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled. Returning inflation to our 2 percent goal is necessary to achieve a sustainably strong labor market and economy. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Hawaii Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs' Division of Financial Institutions, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of the recent Hawaii wildfires on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the affected disaster areas can be found athttps://www.fema.gov/disasters. Lending:The agencies encouragefinancial institutions to work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by the Hawaii wildfires. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas are supported by the agencies and should not be subject to examiner criticism. In accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, institutions should individually evaluate modifications of existing loans to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings or modifications to borrowers experiencing financial difficulty, as applicable. In making this evaluation, institutions should consider the facts and circumstances of each borrower and modification. In supervising institutions affected by the Hawaii wildfires, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after the Hawaii wildfires. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by the Hawaii wildfires. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by the Hawaii wildfires may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by the Hawaii wildfires that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of the Hawaii wildfires. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, refer to the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Institutions are encouraged to monitor municipal securities and loans affected by the Hawaii wildfires. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by the disaster and encourage institutions to engage in appropriate monitoring and take prudent efforts to stabilize such investments. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: CSBS:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/financial/2017/fil17062.html FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision/letters-credit-unions-other-guidance/examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Resources: Hawaii Wildfires
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Comerica Bank, of Dallas, Texas, to establish a branch at 4145 South Cooper Street, Arlington, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it is seeking individuals with a diverse set of expert insurance perspectives in life, property and casualty, and reinsurance issues to serve on its Insurance Policy Advisory Committee, or IPAC. The IPAC is comprised of 21 members who serve staggered three-year terms and have diverse professional backgrounds, including insurance accounting, actuarial science, academia, insurance regulation, and policyholder advocacy. Each year, the Board selects seven individuals to each serve three-year terms. The Board may select additional individuals to fill any term that is unexpired and vacated by an existing member. Interested individuals may submit a Statement of Interest to the Board between Monday, August 7 and Monday, October 2, 2023. The Board plans to announce the appointment of members later this year. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions on how to apply for IPAC membership, can be found in theFederal Registernotice. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Solicitation of Statements of Interest for Membership on the Insurance Policy Advisory Committee Insurance Policy Advisory Committee
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: HSBC Holdings PLC, London, United Kingdom and HSBC North America Holdings Inc., New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated September 29, 2017 (PDF)Terminated August 18, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday issued an enforcement action and fined Regions Bank, of Birmingham, Alabama, approximately $2.95 million for unsafe and unsound practices in its flood insurance compliance program and for flood insurance regulatory violations. The Board fined Regions for its failure to effectively monitor a portfolio of home equity loans for compliance with flood insurance regulations due to changes in loan servicing platforms and third-party service providers. The Board also fined Regions for a pattern or practice of individual violations of flood insurance regulations. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced an enforcement action against Farmington State Bank, of Farmington, Washington, and its holding company, FBH Corporation. In 2022, Farmington improperly changed its business plan without notifying the bank's supervisors and obtaining prior approval for those changes. Farmington has previously announced that it will voluntarily sell its loans and deposits to the Bank of Eastern Oregon. The Board's action ensures the bank's operations will wind down in a manner that protects the bank's depositors and the Deposit Insurance Fund. The action also prohibits Farmington and FBH from making dividends or capital distributions, dissipating cash assets, and engaging in certain activities without approval from its supervisors. The action is being taken jointly with the Washington State Department of Financial Institutions, the state supervisor of Farmington. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday provided additional information on its program to supervise novel activities in the banks it oversees. Novel activities include complex, technology-driven partnerships with non-banks to provide banking services to customers; and activities that involve crypto-assets and distributed ledger or "blockchain" technology. The goal of the novel activities supervision program is to foster the benefits of financial innovation while recognizing and appropriately addressing risks to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system. The program will be integrated into the Federal Reserve's existing supervisory processes, with program experts working alongside current supervisory teams to oversee banks engaged in novel activities. Also on Tuesday, the Board provided additional information on the process for a state bank supervised by the Federal Reserve to follow before engaging in certain dollar token or stablecoin activity, including demonstrating to its Federal Reserve supervisors that it has appropriate safeguards to conduct the activity safely and soundly. Today's announcements are part of the Federal Reserve's ongoing work to create greater clarity for all parties as financial services and related technologies continue to evolve. These announcements build on the Board's Januarypolicy statement, which provides clarity on limitations on certain activities, promoting a level playing field for banks with a federal supervisor. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. SR 23-7: Creation of Novel Activities Supervision Program SR 23-8 / CA 23-5: Supervisory Nonobjection Process for State Member Banks Seeking to Engage in Certain Activities Involving Dollar Tokens
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about banks' reserve balance management strategies and practices, their deposit pricing strategies, their expectations for potential changes in both the size and composition of their balance sheets, and their views regarding Federal Reserve facilities. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between May 5, 2023, and May 19, 2023, and includes responses from banks that held a bit more than three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected]. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
Chair Jerome H. Powell At “Structural Shifts in the Global Economy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming Good morning. At last year's Jackson Hole symposium, I delivered a brief, direct message. My remarks this year will be a bit longer, but the message is the same: It is the Fed's job to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal, and we will do so. We have tightened policy significantly over the past year. Although inflation has moved down from its peak—a welcome development—it remains too high. We are prepared to raise rates further if appropriate, and intend to hold policy at a restrictive level until we are confident that inflation is moving sustainably down toward our objective. Today I will review our progress so far and discuss the outlook and the uncertainties we face as we pursue our dual mandate goals. I will conclude with a summary of what this means for policy. Given how far we have come, at upcoming meetings we are in a position to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. The Decline in Inflation So FarThe ongoing episode of high inflation initially emerged from a collision between very strong demand and pandemic-constrained supply. By the time the Federal Open Market Committee raised the policy rate in March 2022, it was clear that bringing down inflation would depend on both the unwinding of the unprecedented pandemic-related demand and supply distortions and on our tightening of monetary policy, which would slow the growth of aggregate demand, allowing supply time to catch up. While these two forces are now working together to bring down inflation, the process still has a long way to go, even with the more favorable recent readings. On a 12-month basis, U.S. total, or "headline," PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation peaked at 7 percent in June 2022 and declined to 3.3 percent as of July, following a trajectory roughly in line with global trends (figure 1, panel A).1The effects of Russia's war against Ukraine have been a primary driver of the changes in headline inflation around the world since early 2022. Headline inflation is what households and businesses experience most directly, so this decline is very good news. But food and energy prices are influenced by global factors that remain volatile, and can provide a misleading signal of where inflation is headed. In my remaining comments, I will focus on core PCE inflation, which omits the food and energy components. On a 12-month basis, core PCE inflation peaked at 5.4 percent in February 2022 and declined gradually to 4.3 percent in July (figure 1, panel B). The lower monthly readings for core inflation in June and July were welcome, but two months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. We can't yet know the extent to which these lower readings will continue or where underlying inflation will settle over coming quarters. Twelve-month core inflation is still elevated, and there is substantial further ground to cover to get back to price stability. To understand the factors that will likely drive further progress, it is useful to separately examine the three broad components of core PCE inflation—inflation for goods, for housing services, and for all other services, sometimes referred to as nonhousing services (figure 2). Core goods inflation has fallen sharply, particularly for durable goods, as both tighter monetary policy and the slow unwinding of supply and demand dislocations are bringing it down. The motor vehicle sector provides a good illustration. Earlier in the pandemic, demand for vehicles rose sharply, supported by low interest rates, fiscal transfers, curtailed spending on in-person services, and shifts in preference away from using public transportation and from living in cities. But because of a shortage of semiconductors, vehicle supply actually fell. Vehicle prices spiked, and a large pool of pent-up demand emerged. As the pandemic and its effects have waned, production and inventories have grown, and supply has improved. At the same time, higher interest rates have weighed on demand. Interest rates on auto loans have nearly doubled since early last year, and customers report feeling the effect of higher rates on affordability.2On net, motor vehicle inflation has declined sharply because of the combined effects of these supply and demand factors. Similar dynamics are playing out for core goods inflation overall. As they do, the effects of monetary restraint should show through more fully over time. Core goods prices fell the past two months, but on a 12-month basis, core goods inflation remains well above its pre-pandemic level. Sustained progress is needed, and restrictive monetary policy is called for to achieve that progress. In the highly interest-sensitive housing sector, the effects of monetary policy became apparent soon after liftoff. Mortgage rates doubled over the course of 2022, causing housing starts and sales to fall and house price growth to plummet. Growth in market rents soon peaked and then steadily declined (figure 3).3 Measured housing services inflation lagged these changes, as is typical, but has recently begun to fall. This inflation metric reflects rents paid by all tenants, as well as estimates of the equivalent rents that could be earned from homes that are owner occupied.4Because leases turn over slowly, it takes time for a decline in market rent growth to work its way into the overall inflation measure. The market rent slowdown has only recently begun to show through to that measure. The slowing growth in rents for new leases over roughly the past year can be thought of as "in the pipeline" and will affect measured housing services inflation over the coming year. Going forward, if market rent growth settles near pre-pandemic levels, housing services inflation should decline toward its pre-pandemic level as well. We will continue to watch the market rent data closely for a signal of the upside and downside risks to housing services inflation. The final category, nonhousing services, accounts for over half of the core PCE index and includes a broad range of services, such as health care, food services, transportation, and accommodations. Twelve-month inflation in this sector has moved sideways since liftoff. Inflation measured over the past three and six months has declined, however, which is encouraging. Part of the reason for the modest decline of nonhousing services inflation so far is that many of these services were less affected by global supply chain bottlenecks and are generally thought to be less interest sensitive than other sectors such as housing or durable goods. Production of these services is also relatively labor intensive, and the labor market remains tight. Given the size of this sector, some further progress here will be essential to restoring price stability. Over time, restrictive monetary policy will help bring aggregate supply and demand back into better balance, reducing inflationary pressures in this key sector. The OutlookTurning to the outlook, although further unwinding of pandemic-related distortions should continue to put some downward pressure on inflation, restrictive monetary policy will likely play an increasingly important role. Getting inflation sustainably back down to 2 percent is expected to require a period of below-trend economic growth as well as some softening in labor market conditions. Economic growthRestrictive monetary policy has tightened financial conditions, supporting the expectation of below-trend growth.5Since last year's symposium, the two-year real yield is up about 250 basis points, and longer-term real yields are higher as well—by nearly 150 basis points.6Beyond changes in interest rates, bank lending standards have tightened, and loan growth has slowed sharply.7Such a tightening of broad financial conditions typically contributes to a slowing in the growth of economic activity, and there is evidence of that in this cycle as well. For example, growth in industrial production has slowed, and the amount spent on residential investment has declined in each of the past five quarters (figure 4). But we are attentive to signs that the economy may not be cooling as expected. So far this year, GDP (gross domestic product) growth has come in above expectations and above its longer-run trend, and recent readings on consumer spending have been especially robust. In addition, after decelerating sharply over the past 18 months, the housing sector is showing signs of picking back up. Additional evidence of persistently above-trend growth could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy. The labor marketThe rebalancing of the labor market has continued over the past year but remains incomplete. Labor supply has improved, driven by stronger participation among workers aged 25 to 54 and by an increase in immigration back toward pre-pandemic levels. Indeed, the labor force participation rate of women in their prime working years reached an all-time high in June. Demand for labor has moderated as well. Job openings remain high but are trending lower. Payroll job growth has slowed significantly. Total hours worked has been flat over the past six months, and the average workweek has declined to the lower end of its pre-pandemic range, reflecting a gradual normalization in labor market conditions (figure 5). This rebalancing has eased wage pressures. Wage growth across a range of measures continues to slow, albeit gradually (figure 6). While nominal wage growth must ultimately slow to a rate that is consistent with 2 percent inflation, what matters for households is real wage growth. Even as nominal wage growth has slowed, real wage growth has been increasing as inflation has fallen. We expect this labor market rebalancing to continue. Evidence that the tightness in the labor market is no longer easing could also call for a monetary policy response. Uncertainty and Risk Management along the Path ForwardTwo percent is and will remain our inflation target. We are committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to that level over time. It is challenging, of course, to know in real time when such a stance has been achieved. There are some challenges that are common to all tightening cycles. For example, real interest rates are now positive and well above mainstream estimates of the neutral policy rate. We see the current stance of policy as restrictive, putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. But we cannot identify with certainty the neutral rate of interest, and thus there is always uncertainty about the precise level of monetary policy restraint. That assessment is further complicated by uncertainty about the duration of the lags with which monetary tightening affects economic activity and especially inflation. Since the symposium a year ago, the Committee has raised the policy rate by 300 basis points, including 100 basis points over the past seven months. And we have substantially reduced the size of our securities holdings. The wide range of estimates of these lags suggests that there may be significant further drag in the pipeline. Beyond these traditional sources of policy uncertainty, the supply and demand dislocations unique to this cycle raise further complications through their effects on inflation and labor market dynamics. For example, so far, job openings have declined substantially without increasing unemployment—a highly welcome but historically unusual result that appears to reflect large excess demand for labor. In addition, there is evidence that inflation has become more responsive to labor market tightness than was the case in recent decades.8These changing dynamics may or may not persist, and this uncertainty underscores the need for agile policymaking. These uncertainties, both old and new, complicate our task of balancing the risk of tightening monetary policy too much against the risk of tightening too little. Doing too little could allow above-target inflation to become entrenched and ultimately require monetary policy to wring more persistent inflation from the economy at a high cost to employment. Doing too much could also do unnecessary harm to the economy. ConclusionAs is often the case, we are navigating by the stars under cloudy skies. In such circumstances, risk-management considerations are critical. At upcoming meetings, we will assess our progress based on the totality of the data and the evolving outlook and risks. Based on this assessment, we will proceed carefully as we decide whether to tighten further or, instead, to hold the policy rate constant and await further data. Restoring price stability is essential to achieving both sides of our dual mandate. We will need price stability to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. We will keep at it until the job is done. 1. Descriptions of PCE inflation include Board staff estimates of the July 2023 values based on available information, including the July 2023 consumer price index and producer price index data. The July 2023 PCE inflation data will be published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on August 31, 2023.Return to text 2. For example, 25 percent of respondents to the most recent University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers reported that it is currently a bad time to buy a new vehicle because of higher interest rates and tighter credit conditions, up from only 4 percent of respondents in 2021. For more information, see the preliminary results of the August 2023 survey, available on the University of Michigan's website athttp://www.sca.isr.umich.edu.Return to text 3. This slowing in rent growth has likely occurred for a combination of reasons. Some of it likely reflects higher interest rates and the softening in real household income growth over the past couple of years. But the normalization of dislocations due to the pandemic is likely playing a role here as well. For example, the shifts in housing preferences related to working from home likely contributed to the increase in housing demand reflected in the sizable earlier increases in rents. As the price effects of that demand shift played out, the growth rate of rents would naturally decline toward its earlier trend. Finally, multifamily construction is quite high by historical standards, and that supply coming on line has likely also taken some pressure off market rents.Return to text 4. PCE prices for housing services include both the rents paid by tenants and an imputed rental value for owner-occupied dwellings (measured as the income the homeowner could have received if the house had been rented to a tenant). For additional details, see Bureau of Economic Analysis (2022), "Rental Income of Persons (PDF)," inNIPA Handbook: Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts(Washington: BEA, December), pp. 12-1–12-15.Return to text 5. For an example of how tighter financial conditions affect economic activity, see the Federal Reserve Board staff's new index measuring U.S. financial conditions through their effect on the outlook for growth; the index is discussed in Andrea Ajello, Michele Cavallo, Giovanni Favara, William B. Peterman, John W. Schindler IV, and Nitish R. Sinha (2023), "A New Index to Measure U.S. Financial Conditions," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 30).Return to text 6. Changes in real yields cited in this sentence refer to changes in yields on 2- and 10-year Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities.Return to text 7. In addition, as the policy rate increased, nonbanking lending conditions changed as well. For example, beginning in 2022 and continuing into the first half of this year, net issuance of riskier debt—such as leveraged loans and speculative-grade and unrated corporate bonds—in public credit markets declined.Return to text 8. The relationship between labor market slack and inflation, often called the Phillips curve relationship, is likely nonlinear, steepening in a tight labor market. If the Phillips curve has steepened in this way, a small change in labor market tightness could result in a more substantial change in inflation. It is difficult to know with precision how steep that relationship is in real time or how it might evolve as labor market tightness changes. For more information on nonlinearities in this relationship, see Christoph E. Boehm and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2022), "Convex Supply Curves,"American Economic Review, vol. 112 (December), pp. 3941–69; Pierpaolo Benigno and Gauti B. Eggertsson (2023), "It's Baaack: The Surge in Inflation in the 2020s and the Return of the Non-Linear Phillips Curve (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 31197 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April); and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Lu Zhang, and Lars-Alexander Kuehn (2018), "Endogenous Disasters,"American Economic Review,vol. 108 (August), pp. 2212–45.Return to text Accessible Version
No content found
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on July 17 and 26, 2023. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on July 25-26, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 25-26, 2023:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At “Fed Listens: Joining the Labor Force after COVID, A Discussion on Youth Employment,” hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Thank you, President Goolsbee. It is a pleasure to be here today to participate in our first in-personFed Listensevent in Chicago since before the pandemic. I am really looking forward to being a part of today's conversation. When we beganFed Listensin 2019, the initiative was part of a broad, comprehensive review of the decisionmaking framework the Federal Open Market Committee uses when making decisions that impact the economy. Since that time, we have met with people across the country from a wide range of backgrounds and perspectives, and we've learned about how our monetary policy actions affect them, their businesses, and their communities. In light of the insights we gained during those original listening sessions, we decided to expand the scope ofFed Listensto become an ongoing process of consultation with the public to better understand economic conditions from their point of view. TheseFed Listensevents provide us with a valuable opportunity to learn about the economy by engaging directly with those experiencing economic conditions. These conversations provide context for the economic and financial data that we monitor, and they help us look beneath the national-level data reporting to see how Americans in different areas of the country are faring. So, again, I am very happy to be here in Chicago with President Goolsbee to learn about the topic of today'sFed Listens, which focuses on the experiences of young people as they enter the workforce. An important aspect of that transition to employment is whether young people are effectively prepared, and whether our economy has enough skilled workers to meet the growing demand. It's not possible for America to achieve sustained economic prosperity unless young people are equipped with the benefit of an effective education system and have access to opportunity. Like many families during the pandemic, my family faced challenges with school closures and a lack of access to normal childhood activities and social interactions. As our education system works to address the lasting impacts of student learning losses and the increased emergence of mental health issues, it is critical that we recognize the challenges many are facing as they prepare to enter the workforce. The pandemic was a very difficult period for young people and their parents, many of whom were forced to choose between continuing to work and caring for their children. It is encouraging to see that many of these challenges have eased, and that we can focus more intently on what young people need most to succeed. One positive development that is supporting the transition of young people into the labor force has been the tight labor market and the reversal of pandemic-period trends for young workers, who typically have limited work experience. In the wake of economic downturns, it is usually those young workers who are most impacted by unemployment and take the longest to regain lost ground. During this period, however, the share of 18-to-24-year-olds who are employed has recovered to around where it was just before the pandemic and has outpaced the employment recovery since the pandemic low for those in their prime working years, between ages 25 and 54. In addition, wages for young workers have grown more quickly over the past several years than wages for prime-age workers.1 Although this is great news for today's youth, young people still face significant longer‑term challenges. For example, the share of "disconnected" young adults, who are not participating in the workforce or continuing their education, has been rising over the past 20 years.2Young adults who disengage from these wealth- and income-building opportunities often face long-term disadvantages, which is concerning both for the individual and for the economy as a whole. Educating young people and preparing them with skills required to participate in the future workforce will have long-lasting, positive impacts on economic productivity. Rising productivity allows living standards to improve without contributing to inflation. In this way, the successful transition of today's youth into the workforce is directly tied to the Fed's mission and to our monetary policy goals of maximum, inclusive employment and price stability. The decisions we face must be, and will continue to be, informed by the perspectives that each of you brings to the table today about how to help young people transition successfully into the workforce. Those decisions will be better decisions once we have had the opportunity to learn from today's participants and have gained a better understanding of the challenges and possible solutions. Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in today'sFed Listensevent. I look forward to our discussion. 1. See Elise Gould, Katherine DeCourcy, and Jori Kandra (2023), "Class of 2023: Young Workers Have Experienced Strong Wage Growth since 2020," Economic Policy Institute,Working Economics Blog,May 4.Return to text 2. See Anna Crockett and Xiaohan Zhang (2023), "Young Adults Are Disconnected from Work and School due to Long-Term Labor Force Trends," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,Communities Blog,April 6.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Fed Listens: Community Listening Session" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia Thank you, President Bostic.1When the Board began theFed Listensinitiative, our purpose was to engage directly with the public to discuss issues related to our monetary policy decision-making framework and our efforts to pursue the congressionally-mandated monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment. Since that time, and as a recognition of the importance of engaging with people across the country from a wide range of geographies and perspectives, we broadened the scope to become an ongoing process of consultation with the public. ThroughFed Listensand other Board and System convenings, we can learn directly from those experiencing the economy about how households and businesses are faring, and how they are affected by Federal Reserve decisions. In the latest of those decisions, on July 26 the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points and decided to continue reducing the Fed's securities holdings, both actions aimed at bringing down inflation. I look forward to hearing from today's participants about how inflation and higher interest rates are affecting their day-to-day decision making. But first, I will briefly share my thinking on, and why I supported, the FOMC's latest decision. As many of you know, since March of last year the FOMC has significantly increased the federal funds rate, which is our primary monetary policy tool. The goal is to raise interest rates throughout the economy to bring demand into better balance with supply and reduce upward pricing pressures. We have made progress in lowering inflation over the past year, but inflation is still significantly above the FOMC's two percent target, and the labor market continues to be tight, with job openings still far exceeding the number of available workers. Economic activity has grown at a moderate pace, and even as banks have been tightening their lending standards in response to higher interest rates and funding costs, lending to businesses and households has continued to expand. Given these developments, I supported raising the federal funds rate at our July meeting, and I expect that additional increases will likely be needed to lower inflation to the FOMC's goal. Of course, monetary policy is not on a pre-set path, and I will be closely monitoring the incoming data and their implications for the economic outlook. I will be looking for evidence that inflation is on a consistent and meaningful downward path as I consider whether further increases in the federal funds rate will be needed, and how long the federal funds rate will need to remain at a sufficiently restrictive level. I know that high inflation has been a hardship, especially for lower- and middle-income families, who spend the majority of their income on necessities. Returning inflation to two percent will help American families focus on important decisions other than inflation. Addressing high inflation will ensure that it is no longer a factor for spending and investment decisions and will help put the U.S. economy on a course of ongoing economic growth and rising standards of living. But I also know that higher interest rates have made it more difficult for many to get a loan, to buy a home or a car, and for businesses to invest and expand. I am interested to hear the ways in which inflation and higher interest rates are affecting the day-to-day lives of our participants today. I am also looking forward to learning about how the economy and the Fed's policies are affecting lower-income workers and small businesses, the two subjects of today'sFed Listensevent. Over the past few years, for many, wage and salary increases have not kept up with inflation, and while that general pattern has improved recently, most workers still have not seen wage increases equal to price increases. For workers at the lower end of the wage spectrum, wage gains have been the strongest seen in decades. However, because necessities like groceries and gasoline make up a large share of their household expenses, lower-wage workers have been experiencing the effects of higher prices more acutely than others. We also know from history that a slower economy, with higher unemployment, tends to hit lower-income workers the hardest, so we must remain attuned to the fact that our efforts to reduce inflation have the potential to undermine wage gains and job security for lower-wage workers. Should inflation remain at today's level, or increase again, lower-wage workers would continue to bear the brunt of these effects. Small businesses are also more vulnerable in an economic slowdown than larger businesses, and I am watching carefully to see how they are dealing with both inflation and higher interest rates. Despite high inflation and significant challenges finding workers in a tight labor market, the past few years have been relatively good for small businesses and for new business formation. One noteworthy development is the remarkable surge in entrepreneurship, as evidenced by a significant number of new business start-ups. Rates of new business creation jumped beginning in mid-2020 after lagging for more than a decade. And recent indicators, like applications for new tax identification numbers, suggest the pace remained elevated through the middle of this year. New businesses have also been responsible for a surprising amount of job growth, with an average of one million jobs created each quarter from early 2021 through the end of last year, which is a significantly higher pace than was typical prior to the pandemic.2This extended period of elevated start-up activity has been good for workers, and in a larger sense, good for entrepreneurship. While it may seem hard to believe, many of today's largest businesses began as small businesses. It is entirely possible that the next wealth-creating, world-beating business got its start during the depths of the pandemic. I think I will leave it there, and say thank you again, for the opportunity to be part of this important conversation today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. In particular, Bureau of Labor Statistics data on jobs created by new establishments averaged 980,000 per quarter from 2020:Q3 to 2022:Q4 (the latest observation), compared with 810,000 per quarter from 2009 to 2019.Return to text