Federal bank regulatory agencies today issued the host state loan-to-deposit ratios that are used to evaluate compliance with section 109 of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994. These ratios replace those from June 2022.By law, a bank is generally prohibited from establishing or acquiring branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of acquiring additional deposits. This prohibition seeks to ensure that interstate bank branches will not take deposits from a community without the bank also reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of that community.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At a Fed Listens Event on Transitioning to the Post-Pandemic Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts It is very good to be here, and to be part of thisFed Listensevent and discussion about the effects of the pandemic experience on the U.S. economy, highlighting challenges in the labor and housing markets. While there are many ways to think about the impact of these effects, I find it helpful to consider both the cyclical or temporary factors and those that are structural and longer term. As monetary policymakers, we are primarily focused on the cyclical matters—meaning how the pandemic and the measures taken to address it complicated accomplishing our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Making the best monetary policy decisions over the business cycle requires distinguishing between temporary effects and lasting, structural changes. Today's agenda includes the employment recovery following the high unemployment during the spring of 2020 leading to the current tight labor market. Today's labor market strength reflects policy decisions taken in light of the pandemic experience, including the widespread lockdowns, reliance upon remote work, and other factors that may have structurally altered the labor market. I am very much looking forward to the discussion. I also look forward to learning from the perspectives of today's participants from around New England about the issues that will be discussed today. I find it especially helpful to participate in regional discussions to broaden my understanding of economic conditions throughout the country. This local perspective is one of the great advantages of the Federal Reserve System's regional structure, and of theFed Listensinitiative, which complements the Board's efforts to understand national economic conditions. In 2019, the Board launchedFed Listenswith a year of listening sessions with the public focused on monetary policy and, specifically, on how the Federal Open Market Committee uses interest rates and other tools to promote a healthy economy. While data can tell us a lot, learning about the experiences behind those data helps bring economic data to life for me and for my colleagues. ThroughFed Listensand other engagements with the public, we hear about how Americans are faring in the economy and about how our policy decisions affect individuals, businesses, and communities. So our efforts to enhance our ability to listen have continued and have become what I expect will be, and certainly should be, a permanent feature of the Federal Reserve's decisionmaking. Since the pandemic, and with the onset of high inflation, we have seen shifts in the availability of affordable housing and in the housing market more generally. I'm interested to hear how these impacts are being felt in New England. The availability and affordability of housing are critical for families and for communities seeking to attract new jobs and the workers to fill those new employment opportunities. Distinguishing between the short-term effects of the pandemic and longer-term structural shifts in the economy is crucial in making the near-term policy decisions to achieve our dual-mandate goals. In the near term, higher interest rates intended to lower inflation work most directly in the housing market. While we expect lower rents will eventually be reflected in inflation data as new leases make their way into the calculations, the residential real estate market appears to be rebounding, with home prices leveling out recently, which has implications for our fight to lower inflation. The pandemic abruptly changed the lives of most Americans and their families, and it fed a surge of demand for those who sought larger homes. It ushered in a wave of homebuilding and renovation that was a significant contributing factor for inflation and supply chain challenges. Much of that initial inflation has moderated, but it will be important to understand the long-term effect of the pandemic environment on household formation and housing demand going forward. Thank you again, President Collins, for hosting thisFed Listensevent and for the opportunity to be part of this discussion.
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the IE University – Banco de España – Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Conference Current Challenges in Economics and Finance, Madrid, Spain Thank you for inviting me to speak today. Climate change is real, but I do not believe it poses a serious risk to the safety and soundness of large banks or the financial stability of the United States.1Risks are risks. There is no need for us to focus on one set of risks in a way that crowds out our focus on others. My job is to make sure that the financial system is resilient to a range of risks. And I believe risks posed by climate change are not sufficiently unique or material to merit special treatment relative to others.2Nevertheless, I think it's important to continue doing high-quality academic research regarding the role that climate plays in economic outcomes, such as the work presented at today's conference. In what follows, I want to be careful not to conflate my views on climate change itself with my views on how we should deal with financial risks associated with climate change. I believe the scientific community has rigorously established that our climate is changing. But my role is not to be a climate policymaker. Consistent with the Fed's mandates, I must focus on financial risks, and the questions I'm exploring today are about whether the financial risks associated with climate change are different enough from other financial stability risks to merit special treatment. But before getting to those questions, I'd like to briefly explain how we think about financial stability at the Federal Reserve. Financial stability is at the core of the Federal Reserve and our mission. The Federal Reserve was created in 1913, following the Banking Panic of 1907, with the goal of promoting financial stability and avoiding banking panics. Responsibilities have evolved over the years. In the aftermath of the 2007-09 financial crisis, Congress assigned the Fed additional responsibilities related to promoting financial stability, and the Board of Governors significantly increased the resources dedicated to that purpose. Events in recent years, including the pandemic, emerging geopolitical risks, and recent stress in the banking sector have only highlighted the important role central banks have in understanding and addressing financial stability risks. The Federal Reserve's goal in financial stability is to help ensure that financial institutions and financial markets remain able to provide critical services to households and businesses so that they can continue to support a well-functioning economy through the business cycle. Much of how we think about and monitor financial stability at the Federal Reserve is informed by our understanding of how shocks can propagate across financial markets and affect the economy. Economists have studied the role of debt in the macroeconomy dating all the way back to Irving Fisher in the 1930s, and in the past 40 years it has been well established that financial disruptions can reduce the efficiency of credit allocation and have real effects on the broader economy.3When borrowers' financial conditions deteriorate, lenders tend to charge higher rates on loans. That, in turn, can lead to less overall lending and negatively affect the broader economy.4And in the wake of the 2007-09 financial crisis, we've learned more about the important roles credit growth and asset price growth play in "boom-bust" cycles.5 Fundamentally, financial stress emerges when someone is owed something and doesn't get paid back or becomes worried they won't be paid back. If I take out a loan from you and can't repay it, you take a loss. Similarly, if I take out a mortgage from a bank and I can't repay it, the bank could take a loss. And if the bank hasn't built sufficient ability to absorb those losses, it may not be able to pay its depositors back. These dynamics can have knock-on effects on asset prices. For example, when people default on their home mortgage loans, banks foreclose and seek to sell the homes, often at steep discounts. Those foreclosure sales can have contagion effects on nearby house prices.6When a lot of households and businesses take such losses around the same time, it can have real effects on the economy as consumption and investment spending take a hit and overall trust in financial institutions wanes. The same process works when market participants fear they won't be paid back or be able to sell their assets. Those fears themselves can drive instability. The implication is that risks to financial stability have a couple of features. First, the risks must have relatively near-term effects, such that the risk manifesting could result in outstanding contracts being breached. Second, the risks must be material enough to create losses large enough to affect the real economy. These insights about vulnerabilities across the financial system inform how we think about monitoring financial stability at the Federal Reserve. We identify risks and prioritize resources around those that are most threatening to the U.S. financial system. We distinguish between shocks, which are inherently difficult to predict, and vulnerabilities of the financial system, which can be monitored through the ebb and flow of the economic cycle. If you think about it, there is a huge set of shocks that could hit at any given time. Some of those shocks do hit, but most do not. Our approach promotes general resiliency, recognizing that we can't predict, prioritize, and tailor specific policy around each and every shock thatcouldoccur.7 Instead, we focus on monitoring broad groups of vulnerabilities, such as overvalued assets, liquidity risk in the financial system, and the amount of debt held by households and businesses, including banks. This approach implies that we are somewhat agnostic to the particular sources of shocks that may hit the economy at any point in time. Risks are risks, and from a policymaking perspective, the source of a particular shock isn't as important as building a financial system that is resilient to the range of risks we face. For example, it is plausible that shocks could stem from things ranging from increasing dependence on computer systems and digital technologies to a shrinking labor force to geopolitical risk. Our focus on fundamental vulnerabilities like asset overvaluation, excessive leverage, and liquidity risk in part reflects our humility about our ability to identify the probabilities of each and every potential shock to our system in real time. Let me provide a tangible example from our capital stress test for the largest banks. We use that stress test to ensure banks have sufficient capital to withstand the types of severe credit-driven recessions we've experienced in the United States since World War II.8We use a design framework for the hypothetical scenarios that results in sharp declines in asset prices coupled with a steep rise in the unemployment rate, but we don't detail the specific shocks that cause the recession because it isn't necessary. What is important is that banks have enough capital to absorb losses associated with those highly adverse conditions. And the losses implied by a scenario like thatarehuge: last year's scenario resulted in hypothetical losses of more than $600 billion for the largest banks. This resulted in a decline in their aggregate common equity capital ratio from 12.4 percent to 9.7 percent, which is still more than double the minimum requirement. That brings us back to my original question: Are the financial risks stemming from climate change somehow different or more material such that we should give them special treatment? Or should our focus remain on monitoring and mitigating general financial system vulnerabilities, which can be affected by climate change over the long-term just like any number of other sources of risk? Before I answer, let me offer some definitions to make sure we're all talking about the same things. Climate-related financial risks are generally separated into two groups: physical risks and transition risks. Physical risks include the potential higher frequency and severity of acute events, such as fires, heatwaves, and hurricanes, as well as slower moving events like rising sea levels. Transition risks refer to those risks associated with an economy and society in transition to one that produces less greenhouse gases. These can owe to government policy changes, changes in consumer preferences, and technology transitions. The question is not whether these risks could result in losses for individuals or companies. The question is whether these risks are unique enough to merit special treatment in our financial stability framework. Let's start with physical risks. Unfortunately, like every year, it is possible we will experience forest fires, hurricanes, and other natural disasters in the coming months. These events, of course, are devastating to local communities. But they are not material enough to pose an outsized risk to the overall U.S. economy. Broadly speaking, physical risks could affect the financial system through two related channels. First, physical risks can have a direct impact on property values. Hurricanes, fires, and rising sea levels can all drive down the values of properties. That in turn could put stress on financial institutions that lend against those properties, which could lead them to curb their lending, and suppress economic growth. The losses that individual property owners can realize might be devastating, but evidence I've seen so far suggests that these sorts of events don't have much of an effect on bank performance.9That may be in part attributable to banks and other investors effectively pricing physical risks from climate change into loan contracts. For example, recently researchers have found that heat stress—a climate physical risk that is likely to affect the economy—has been priced into bond spreads and stock returns since around 2013.10In addition, while it is difficult to isolate the effects of weather events on the broader economy, there is evidence to suggest severe weather events like hurricanes do not likely have an outsized effect on growth rates in countries like the United States.11 Over time, it is possible some of these physical risks could contribute to an exodus of people from certain cities or regions. For example, some worry that rising sea levels could significantly change coastal regions. While the cause may be different, the experience of broad property value declines is not a new one. We have had entire American cities that have experienced significant declines in population and property values over time. Take, for example, Detroit. In 1950, Detroit was the fifth largest city in the United States, but now it isn't even in the top 20, after losing two-thirds of its population. I'm thrilled to see that Detroit has made a comeback in recent years, but the relocation of the automobile industry took a serious toll on the city and its people. Yet the decline in Detroit's population, and commensurate decline in property values, did not pose a financial stability risk to the United States. What makes the potential future risk of a population decline in coastal cities different? Second, and a more compelling concern, is the notion that property value declines could occur more-or-less instantaneously and on a large scale when, say, property insurers leave a region en masse. That sort of rapid decline in property values, which serve as collateral on loans, could certainly result in losses for banks and other financial intermediaries. But there is a growing body of literature that suggests economic agents are already adjusting behavior to account for risks associated with climate change.12That should mitigate the risk of these potential "Minsky moments."13For the sake of argument though, suppose a great repricing does occur; would those losses be big enough to spill over into the broader financial system? Just as a point of comparison, let's turn back to the stress tests I mentioned earlier. Each year the Federal Reserve stresses the largest banks against a hypothetical severe macroeconomic scenario. The stress tests don't cover all risks, of course, but that scenario typically assumes broad real estate price declines of more than 25 percent across the United States. In last year's stress test, the largest banks were able to absorb nearly $100 billion in losses on loans collateralized by real estate, in addition to another half a trillion dollars of losses on other positions.14 What about transition risks? Transition risks are generally neither near-term nor likely to be material given their slow-moving nature and the ability of economic agents to price transition costs into contracts. There seems to be a consensus that orderly transitions will not pose a risk to financial stability.15In that case, changes would be gradual and predictable. Households and businesses are generally well prepared to adjust to slow-moving and predicable changes. As are banks. For example, if banks know that certain industries will gradually become less profitable or assets pledged as collateral will become stranded, they will account for that in their loan pricing, loan duration, and risk assessments. And, because assets held by banks in the United States reprice in less than five years on average, there is ample time to adjust to all but the most abrupt of transitions.16 But what if the transition is disorderly? One argument is that uncertainty associated with a disorderly transition will make it difficult for households and businesses to plan. It is certainly plausible that there could be swings in policy, and those swings could lead to changes in earnings expectations for companies, property values, and the value of commodities. But policy development is often disorderly and subject to the uncertainty of changing economic realities. In the United States, we have a long history of sweeping policy changes ranging from revisions to the tax code to things like changes in healthcare coverage and environmental policies. While these policy changes can certainly affect the composition of industries, the connection to broader financial stability is far less clear. And when policies are found to have large and damaging consequences, policymakers always have, and frequently make use of, the option to adjust course to limit those disruptions. There are also concerns that technology development associated with climate change will be disorderly. Much technology development is disorderly. That is why innovators are often referred to as "disruptors." So, what makes climate-related innovations more disruptive or less predictable than other innovations? Like the innovations of the automobile and the cell phone, I'd expect those stemming from the development of cleaner fuels and more efficient machines to be welfare-increasing on net. So where does that leave us? I don't see a need for special treatment for climate-related risks in our financial stability monitoring and policies. As policymakers, we must balance the broad set of risks we face, and we have a responsibility to prioritize using evidence and analysis. Based on what I've seen so far, I believe that placing an outsized focus on climate-related risks is not needed, and the Federal Reserve should focus on more near-term and material risks in keeping with our mandate. I'd be happy to take a few questions. References Acharya, Viral V., Timothy Johnson, Suresh Sundaresan, and Tuomas Tomunen. 2022."Is Physical Climate Risk Priced? Evidence from Regional Variation in Exposure to Heat Stress." (PDF)Working Paper 30445. National Bureau of Economic Research. Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression."The American Economic Review73 (3): 257–76. Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. "The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework."Handbook of Macroeconomics1: 1341–93. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S157400489910034X. Bickel, Kristian, Sarah N. Hamerling, and Donald P. Morgan. 2021."How Bad Are Weather Disasters for Banks?"Staff Report 990. Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity."Journal of Political Economy91 (3): 401–19. Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2021. "Banking on Deposits: Maturity Transformation without Interest Rate Risk."The Journal of Finance76, no. 3 (June): 1091–1143. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jofi.13013. Financial Stability Board. 2020."The Implications of Climate Change for Financial Stability." Financial Stability Oversight Council. 2021."Report on Climate-Related Financial Risk." (PDF) Harding, John P., Eric Rosenblatt, and Vincent W. Yao. 2009. "The Contagion Effect of Foreclosed Properties."Journal of Urban Economics66, no. 3 (November): 164–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.07.003. Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. "When Credit Bites Back."Journal of Money, Credit and Banking45, no. s2 (December): 3–28. https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12069. Kiley, Michael T. 2021. "What Macroeconomic Conditions Lead Financial Crises?"Journal of International Money and Finance111 (2021): 102316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jimonfin.2020.102316. Linder, M. Henry, Richard Peach, and Sarah Stein. 2013."The Effect of Superstorm Sandy on the Macroeconomy."Liberty Street Economics. Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Meisenzahl, Ralf. 2023. "How Climate Change Shapes Bank Lending: Evidence from Portfolio Reallocation." Working Paper No. 2023-12. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4405234. Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012."Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008."American Economic Review102, no. 2 (April): 1029–61. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. While the actions the Federal Reserve has taken to date are mostly in an exploratory spirit, they could lead to the perception that we intend to give climate change special treatment in the future. For example, recent actions include the organization of a Supervision Climate Committee and a Financial Stability Climate Committee, the issuance of Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions in December 2022, and the pilot Climate Scenario Analysis exercise initiated with the issuance of scenarios in January 2023.Return to text 3. For example, Bernanke (1983) showed how financial disruptions can reduce the availability of credit and reduce aggregate demand, and Diamond and Dybvig (1983) showed how bank runs can affect the real economy.Return to text 4. In their articulation of the financial accelerator, Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) demonstrate concepts like this.Return to text 5. For example, see Schularick and Taylor (2012); Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2013); and Kiley (2021).Return to text 6. For example, Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009) identify a contagion discount on properties close to foreclosed properties.Return to text 7. There are also unanticipated risks, which makes it all the more important to be comprehensive and effective in mitigating known risks.Return to text 8. The conditions characterized by severe post-war recessions with steep rises in unemployment rates and declining asset prices tend to put significant stress on the balance sheets of the largest banks, making them well suited for a capital stress test.Return to text 9. Blickle, Hamerling, and Morgan (2021) study FEMA disasters and find that they have an insignificant or small effect on U.S. banks' performance.Return to text 10. See Acharya, Johnson, Sundaresan, and Tomunen (2022).Return to text 11. See Linder, Peach, and Stein (2013) for a study of the effect of Hurricane Sandy on the economy.Return to text 12. For example, in addition to the previously mentioned Acharya et al. paper, in a recent paper Meisenzahl (2023) shows that banks have reduced lending in areas more affected by climate change.Return to text 13. Based on the work of economist Hyman Minsky, this is the sudden onset of a market crash when sentiment shifts following a period of rapid speculative growth.Return to text 14. Total losses were $612 billion, of which losses on first-lien mortgages, home equity, and commercial real estate loans were $98.8 billion. Seehttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2022-dfast-results-20220623.pdf.Return to text 15. In their reports on climate-related risks to the financial system, both the Financial Stability Board (2020) and the Financial Stability Oversight Council (2021) indicate that risks to the financial system associated with an orderly transition are most likely contained.Return to text 16. Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2021) estimated the average asset repricing maturity between 1997 and 2013 was 4.23 years.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2023 Spring Commencement, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama Thank you for that kind introduction, Dr. Chambers. Hello, Tuskegee University Class of 2023! It is a distinct pleasure and tremendous honor to return to the great Tuskegee University as your commencement speaker and to share this day with you, your friends, and your family. The last time I was here, I participated in a symposium in honor of the late Andrew Brimmer, the economist, first African American to serve on the Federal Reserve Board, and former chair of the Board of Trustees of Tuskegee. I would like to thank my family from all over the country for joining me here today. This graduation is an especially celebratory day in your life because you made it through the upheaval of the pandemic and the disruption and uncertainty it brought. That makes this occasion all the more meaningful. And today you will receive diplomas from one of the most prestigious institutions of higher learning and innovation-centered universities in the world. That is cause for pride and joy. And I think we should start with a round of applause for the graduates! Let's also take a moment to appreciate the friends, families, instructors, professors, and staff who supported and helped you get to this memorable day with a round of applause. And a round of applause for the best HBCU in America—that is, apart from my alma mater, Spelman College. I have to say that if I ever want to visit family in Atlanta again. The pride that you feel in your soon-to-be alma mater will stay with you. As you make your way in the world, Tuskegee and its rich heritage will always be a part of you and your story of achievement. And it will always be a place to call home. You will inspire others to know and attend HBCUs, and they, like you, will look back with reverence and gratitude and feel a connection to an enduring legacy. InspirationInspiration fuels me. And I have been lucky to have many who have inspired me over the course of my life. As a young girl growing up in Milledgeville, Georgia, that inspiration came from family and extended family who were trailblazers in their own right, some of whom are Tuskegee alumni. They were pioneers in many fields and worked at the forefront of the Civil Rights Movement. And they set examples that told me, loud and clear, that I could excel at anything productive in life that I put my mind to. And the HBCUs we attended imparted this same lesson when they told us that you should let your reach exceed your grasp. My parents, uncles, aunts, and cousins reached far. My mother, Mary Murray Cook, integrated her faculty, as did my uncle, Samuel DuBois Cook, who became the first tenured Black faculty member at a major southern university, Duke, and president of another HBCU, Dillard University. And Floyd McKissick, Sr., who was one of Martin Luther King, Jr.,'s deputies, spoke at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom and integrated the University of North Carolina School of Law. Like many of you, because of these role models, I never thought that there were things I was not capable of. We learn from the world around us. And, while I saw the lasting imprint of segregation and gender expectations, the world around me—the one populated by my family, friends, extended family, and church members—thoroughly contradicted them. My mother and aunts were professors and teachers in math and science. One aunt, Dr. Loretta Murray Braxton, was chair of the math department at Virginia State University for decades, and another aunt, Wivona Murray Ward, who is with me here today and just celebrated her 85th birthday, was a math teacher in the Norfolk, Virginia, public school system for 35 years. They were models of excellence, making math and science a home and a comfort, nurturing my innate curiosity wherever it roamed. That curiosity—as it did for all of you—eventually led me here to Tuskegee. Learning starts with discovery, proceeds to mastery, and, with enough curiosity, tenacity, and encouragement, eventually achieves innovation. And that is what makes Tuskegee so vital to you, our nation, and, indeed, the world. My research in the economics of innovation led me squarely to your most famous professor, George Washington Carver, one of America's most prolific innovators. As you know, his work on crop rotation is credited with saving southern agriculture from the twin ravages of soil depletion and the boll weevil. And just for fun, he developed synthetics for adhesives, flour, instant coffee, milk flakes, Worcestershire sauce—yes, Worcestershire sauce—and hundreds and hundreds of other products. In the course of building what was at the time the most extensive data set of African American inventors and patentees, I was struck to find that he only patented three discoveries out of more than one thousand. Why? In part, Carver was unable to obtain patents, because plants could not be patented in the U.S. for most of his career. But another reason speaks to Tuskegee's broader mission and effect on the world. You are heirs to a university dedicated to spreading knowledge for the betterment of all humanity. Why even try to patent all those opportunities to improve the human condition, when Dr. Carver's mission was to see his ideas sown as widely as the crops he wished to seed across the South? To be sure, Tuskegee University's legacy of nurturing invention and innovation extends to the present day. In the early 2000s, the first inventor I ever interviewed for my research was the inventor of the Super Soaker, Nerf guns, and nuclear power technology for spacecraft. Dr. Lonnie G. Johnson, a Tuskegee-trained mechanical and nuclear engineer, has been called one of "the most brilliant inventors of our time."1It's not just for Super Soakers. After stints in the U.S. Air Force, NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, he is now working on next-generation rechargeable batteries and energy production, as well as developing new scientists, inventors, and innovators through his lab. Think about what all that could mean. The innovation that comes from a special place like Tuskegee matters. It is through innovation that our economy becomes more productive, bringing down costs, pushing up growth, and lifting our standard of living. My research shows that diverse patent teams are more productive than less diverse ones—the more people with different ways of solving problems, the more likely they are to come up with novel ideas and solutions. This is also why every innovation, in whatever discipline, you bring into the world will help not only yourselves but everyone here and everyone everywhere. Growing up with innovators, I am naturally drawn to stories about creativity and invention, about new ways to solve problems, and the people who lead the way. In my own field of economics, one of those people was Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. For anyone unfamiliar with Dr. Alexander, she was the first African American to earn a Ph.D. in economics, which was at the University of Pennsylvania in 1921. She also happened to be the first national president of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, which some of you might know something about. Sadie Alexander's story resonated with me for many reasons. I was fascinated by her life and work. I admired her intellect and determination. And, in a life-changing revelation, she introduced me to economics. In the sixth grade, I entered the county social science fair with a project inspired by Dr. Alexander's work: identifying the major causes of unemployment among Black Americans. Sadie Alexander was never able to practice as an economist. She was actively denied entry to the profession she would make history in on the basis of her race and sex. When I think about the work it takes to write a dissertation and earn a Ph.D. in economics, that outcome is even harder to wrap my head around. I do not think I would have it in me to do what she did next. She went on to become the first Black woman to earn a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania and the first Black woman to pass the bar and practice in the state of Pennsylvania. Dr. Alexander's passion for economics never left her. She continued to think and write about economic issues, and she applied that perspective to her legal work and her public service. When doors closed on her, she found windows. That quality, that perspective on life, can mean the difference between good and great or great and excellent. Looking at the lives of George Washington Carver, Lonnie Johnson, and Sadie Alexander, we can conclude that one of the most important assets any person can have is creative adaptability. No one is good at absolutely everything—I admit Sadie T.M. Alexander comes close. Shuri, of Black Panther fame, comes even closer. We all face hurdles, roadblocks, barriers. One of my barriers was exactly 60 feet long. You see, when I was a Girl Scout, playing softball, it became clear slowly—and I mean that literally—that I did not have—let's put this delicately—running ability. I could run, but it was more like a trot. I was a good catcher but just was not a fast runner. Well, my mom's view was, "Okay. You're a slow runner. We know that, so you will have to find another way. It's not a death knell if you can't run the bases. You will just have to learn how to hit home runs, like Hank Aaron." Sure, that's easy. Just learn how to be Hank Aaron. If you are not familiar with Hank Aaron—born not far from here in Mobile, Alabama—and if you don't know about the home run records Aaron set and the racial barriers he broke throughout his baseball career, you can think of Steph Curry, famed basketball player for the Golden State Warriors. Steph capitalized on his skill—and the three-pointer. As my mom and dad started teaching me, we watched and studied, and I dedicated myself to learning as much as I could about Hank Aaron and his technique. Now, I did not perfect it. But I learned how to do my own teen version of it. And, with a lot of help from my teammates, we wound up winning the Middle Georgia Girl Scouts softball championship. It cemented in me long ago that you do not have to accept your real or perceived station in life. You do not have to accept that your flat feet and slow run will hold you back. You will find your way around it, over it, through it. You find your Hank Aaron. Or your Sadie Alexander, Lonnie Johnson, or George Washington Carver. You find your inspiration. On this day, you also inspire me. Tuskegee is the top producer of Black Ph.D.'s in material science and engineering in the U.S., tops in producing Black aerospace engineers, and a leader in graduating Black chemical, electrical, and mechanical engineers. You did that, and you will do that. But no one walks across a stage like this alone. Your friends, family, communities, and forbearers walk with you. You carry their hopes and dreams along with your own. Those dreams lift you up, today and every day that follows, as you go out and make your mark on the world. And I know you are going to make your mark. ConclusionI have a mug with one of Sadie T.M. Alexander's favorite sayings on it. It is something that inspires me and that I pass on to others. And I know you will do this out in that big, limitless world you are stepping into: "Knock those doors down!" Congratulations, Tuskegee University Class of 2023! I cannot wait to see you go out into the world and knock those doors down! 1. Trisha Gopal and Beryl Shereshewsky (2020), "How a NASA Scientist Accidentally Invented the Super Soaker," CNN,Great Big Story(podcast), August 15, https://www.cnn.com/2020/08/15/us/super-soaker-lonnie-johnson-great-big-story-trnd/index.html#:~:text=Lonnie%20Johnson%20might%20be%20one,20th%20century%2C%20the%20Super%20Soaker.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2023 Spring Convocation, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan Go, Green! Hello, Michigan State University Class of 2023! And congratulations to you and your friends and families! It is wonderful to be back on campus. The Sparty statue. Brody Hall. The botanical gardens that dot the campus. The International Center. The Red Cedar River. The IM West basketball courts. The Dairy Store. The well-manicured lawns that are Spartan Green. It is also great to be back in Michigan. The people, the scenery, the cider donuts . . . the way we can get all four seasons in a single day . . . My connection to Michigan actually started long before I arrived at MSU. I had family who moved up from Georgia during the Great Migration, when African Americans from across the South headed north in search of a better life. In total, 6 million people made that move from about 1910 to 1970. My relatives' story echoes the great American promise. They arrived in Detroit with almost nothing, worked hard, studied intently, and were successful by any measure. They won scholarships to parochial schools, became principals, and rose to the executive level at Chrysler. They even lived next to royalty . . . Motown royalty, that is. Both Diana Ross and Mary Wilson of the Supremes were neighbors who also lived in the Brewster-Douglass housing project. I thought about them a lot as I considered what I wanted to say to MSU's Class of 2023. This is a very important moment, and I wanted to get it right, to do our Spartans and my Michigan roots justice. It is an honor to be invited to speak at commencement. An incredible, terrifying honor. I would be completely comfortable teaching an economics class. I don't know that anyone else would be thrilled, but I would be in my comfort zone. But this occasion calls for more—words of wisdom, hard-earned life advice, moments of gravity and levity. I will let you in on an industry secret: No one has ever, in the pursuit of great oratory, said, "This is a job for an economist!" In the end, I realized that the most important lessons I have learned were exemplified by my family's story—both my biological family and my MSU family. They embody the essential characteristics of life lived to its fullest: education, community, and hope. EducationMy family's journey from the part of rural Georgia between Warm Springs and Pine Mountain to Michigan is a source of pride. Their success was not a given. It was earned through a lot of hard work, some tenacity, and lots of prayer. But their superpower was their undying faith in education. Education was a tenet of faith for my entire family. My mother integrated her university's faculty by both race and gender, and the women in my family—also educators—were all in science and math. That was definitely not the norm in 1960s Georgia. My siblings and I would also go on to integrate our pool, nursery school, and many other venues. It was not an easy time, nor was it without pain, but I count myself as extraordinarily lucky and privileged because I was taught from birth that education can help overcome the toughest odds. My curiosity was more than encouraged, it was lauded. So much so that I actually feel sorry for my teachers. It is entirely possible that my professors formed support groups. In undergrad, over the winter break, I would revise papers in which I already had an A. At the time, I thought I was mastering the subject. As a professor, I realized I was actually crashing their holiday plans. During my doctoral program, if you had a Ph.D. and I saw you in the halls of the Berkeley Economics Department, look out! You werenotgetting out of there without answering a seven-part question. With five follow-ups. Five days a week. Those educators were incredibly gracious and patient, and they fed my need and deep desire to learn. Between them and my family, I understood that education is a lifelong pursuit. And that it expands beyond the classroom. We learn each day just by existing in the world. But the truly curious and the truly passionate will actively seek it out. They open themselves up to new things and walk their own paths. Michigan State has always encouraged its students to think of education this way. I saw it in my classes, and I see it in today's graduates—who range in age from 19 to 53. CommunityCommunity is essential for anyone to thrive. One of life's great lessons is that few of us do anything entirely on our own. Whether it is the people and networks that support us in the day-to-day or the shoulders of our predecessors that we stand on. Community is also about the networks and infrastructure that sustain us. When part of my family made their home in Detroit, they did so in a place of plenty. They had new access to good jobs that offered a path to a comfortable, middle-class life. They lived near Eastern Market, with fresh, affordable produce that stands in stark contrast to so many food deserts decades later. Economic success is not limited to financial wealth. It is a combination of the necessary infrastructure—like meaningful work, healthy food, faith, and quality housing—that together form the foundation for a community to thrive. MSU is the original land-grant university and a model of community. It has a presence in every county in the state and is invested in each of them. The alarms on the Flint water crisis would not have rung were it not for MSU. The soul and spirit of the institution can be seen from the Ohio border to the very top of the Upper Peninsula. It is the essence of community. HopeHope can sometimes be the hardest of the three. It is easy to feel in times of plenty, but it is most valuable when it is most elusive. My Michigan family's story is a quintessential Horatio Alger, bootstrap tale. But, of course, that was not the whole story. They still faced discrimination. Segregation may have been prohibited on paper, but in practice, deeply embedded biases still existed. For instance, in the form of redlining—a practice that kept Black homeownership out of white neighborhoods. When they came to visit, it was remarkable to my Detroit family that their southern relatives owned their own homes. Especially given the professional success my Michigan family had attained. That was not a small issue; homeownership is the principal way people form roots in their communities and build generational wealth. Things were not fair. But they maintained hope, in circumstances that might lead others to throw in the towel. Hope is on my mind the most for all of you. You have education and community down pat—you're Spartans. But you have been through a lot these past four years. Too much. More than any person or lifetime should accommodate. I wish there were a cosmic ledger somewhere that weighed burdens and evened the score, with nothing but smooth sailing from here on out. If I could wave a magic wand or conjure up some vibranium, I would use all my wishes to make it so. Well, I might ask for another couple of NCAA basketball championships, for the men and for the women. But my first and most fervent wish would be to guarantee a charmed life. The turmoil of the past few years will stay with you in big ways and small. We carry life's injuries with us. They make us who we are. But they do not define us. Because strength and resilience are measured against the struggles we have overcome. I look again to my path, that of my own family and those of my friends, students, colleagues, and neighbors. And when we talk about what we have overcome—the struggle for civil rights, the madness of a pandemic, the pain of violence—we should not end our stories there. That pain is important. It should be recognized. But it should not be lived in. And it should not define us. The person you are, and the person you will become, is formed in part by that experience. But joy matters more. Our capacity for joy and kindness andhopeis equally informed by our experiences. Our joy is magnified by the stark relief of the pain we endure. It is sweeter and more life sustaining and more cherished for its ability to thrive in troubled times. Our stories—my family's, mine, yours—are about more than struggle. They are about joy and resilience. They are about our unique ability to see the bad in the world and live happily and loudly and outrageously anyway. Live in the joy. Have hope. Michigan State Spartans, Class of 2023, you fuel my hope. You are ambassadors of education and community. And I feel the hope radiating from you today. You are exceptional, and it is the deepest honor and highest privilege to share in your joy today. Thank you. Go, Green!
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Spring 2023 Economics Commencement Ceremony, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California Thank you, Professor Eichengreen, for that kind introduction. Hello, Berkeley Class of 2023! It is good to be back in Golden Bear and Berkeley Bowl territory. It is good to see so many old friends. I am especially grateful to friends and family from near and far who have joined me here today. It is a great honor and a profound pleasure to be here to congratulate you, the class of 2023, and to welcome you to the field of economics. Let's give the econ graduates assembled here a big Cal cheer. Graduates, you worked very hard to be here today, but your parents, professors, family, and friends deserve your thanks for this accomplishment as well. Let's give a cheer back to those who supported you and lifted you up. "Commencement"—I love that word. An ending to education and training that is also a beginning, with all the promise, nerves, hard work, hope, and opportunity that define this moment. As economists, we think a lot about intertemporal dynamics—what comes before, during, and after an event. So, let us recognize that this beginning came after years of sacrifice, compounded by the uncertainty of a pandemic, and added to the extraordinary stress and joys involved in acquiring the powerful tools economics provides. Your degree attests to this work, and it is worth saying that we see all of this in you today. For graduate students in particular, we professors spend a lot of time trying to convince you that a completed dissertation signals the commencement of your career as an economist, not a magnum opus that signals the culmination or end of your career. Believe me when I say, the richest and most rewarding work still lies ahead! And that is why we see more in you. You are the future of a profession that has a profound effect on how we understand and shape our world. I want to say a little bit about that future today, and the importance of curiosity, of data, and different perspectives in shaping the future. Let's start with curiosity. Economists and other professionals who are supposed to be experts can be uncomfortable admitting they have things to learn. So curiosity that is celebrated when we are younger is later too often trivialized and dismissed. For my part, I have always taken curiosity seriously and consider it to be a sharp tool, a constant companion, a reliable point of entry, and a wise counselor. When I was a Ph.D. student here, I was known to prowl the hallways armed with questions for any professor who might have insights. These faculty have been extremely generous with their thoughts and suggestions, and I have called on them throughout my career, whether to discuss research or policy. And I learned a great deal from my classmates with whom I shared, debated, and clarified ideas, exchanged data, and connected as friends and colleagues. I arrived on Berkeley's campus as the Iron Curtain was falling. In fact, I arrived on campus in 1991 the week the Soviet Union started breaking up and the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic became the Russian Federation. This series of events gave the world an unfiltered view of a Russian economy blinking into the sunlight after decades of central planning and stagnation. What would happen? That question—that curiosity—led me to plow through Tsarist-era statistical tables stashed in the depths of Bancroft Library and then sent me on to the offices of the Russian Statistical Agency and, finally, to obscure Moscow offices and more informal venues for interviews with skittish Russian bankers and entrepreneurs. I credit my Berkeley professors for their guidance and wisdom in supporting the curiosity that took me to Moscow and for asking tough questions that prepared me to succeed there and in my dissertation—questions that stick with me to this day. In a brand-new banking system emerging in a country with limited recent history of free markets and little experience with the rule of law, why should any of our standard models apply? And the bigger question: If we have no models that do apply, can you find new models that might? I will return to this in a moment. Fortunately, I was raised in a large extended family where spiky challenges and enigmatic riddles were called Tuesday. It's best to expect and embrace them. My parents, aunts, uncles, cousins, and church members desegregated their workplaces, schools, and universities. Through it all, I was taught by example that the strongest armor and surest path forward lay in education. Education brought me into contact with a story and a mind that shaped my entire life: Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. Sadie T.M. Alexander was the first national president of Delta Sigma Theta, and I learned about her story when my mother brought a Delta chapter to Georgia College and State University, where she was a professor and where my sisters and I grew up. Dr. Alexander was also the first African American to receive a Ph.D. in economics in 1921, 21 years after our own Jessica Peixotto who was the first woman faculty member in the Berkeley economics department and the second woman to receive a PhD at Berkeley. Sadie Alexander inspired my sixth-grade self to research the causes of African American unemployment for the county social science fair. In her dissertation at the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Alexander set out to explore "what in our judgment constitutes a fair standard of living" for the Black families that were streaming north in search of opportunity as the boll weevil ravaged crops in the South and World War I drew workers into factories.1Now, I learned a lot from looking into the nervous eyes of Russian bankers, and I highly recommend field work for any aspiring Ph.D.'s here, but Dr. Alexander managed to interview 100 families in the course of three months, raising the bar for all of us. She painstakingly translated her surveys into a database to determine what income provided a sufficient standard of living. Which brings us to data. Curiosity is like an appetizer. It gets the meal started, but data are the main course. Without data, your curiosity might yield some opinions. But, as economists, we know that is not evidence. The kind of curiosity and commitment to data that drove Sadie T.M. Alexander also compelled me as a researcher to assemble the most extensive database then available of African American inventors and patent holders. I was curious what effect the lack of rule of law might have on innovation, which undergirds productivity and economic growth, and whether innovation was self-sustaining or contingent on factors like personal security and rule of law. I needed to find the data and generate new data sets to fully understand and explore these questions. And to have actual results to analyze, present, and publish. Unfortunately, we can only imagine what other questions, what other data, Sadie T.M. Alexander would have developed to enrich the field of economics, because she was never able to pursue her chosen field. Discrimination barred that door, so she opened another: becoming a lawyer. Let's just take a moment to stand in awe of the imagination, determination, and willpower at work there. This gets us to perspectives. Sadie T.M. Alexander interviewed 100 families to bring forth data illuminating the conditions driving one of the largest migrations in American history. That was a vital economic question, informed and directed by the life experience and skills of a specific person. And it is a standard all of us as members of this influential field can and should aspire to meet. The Department of Economics at the University of California, Berkeley, is one of the richest sources of diverse talent and perspectives in the world. In our field, we study the behavior of entire populations, and that means our field must reflect the range of people and experiences we aspire to understand. Which brings us toyourperspective. As economists, you share a common mastery of analytical tools that can yield powerful insights about how our society functions. The field of study that binds us gives priority to rigorous use of data and transparent debate. But the type of data you seek, the way you formulate questions, and the shades of meaning you tease out from the results—these are drawn from your unique history, lived experience, and perspective. Economics needs that. Our society needs the fresh puzzles you will uncover, seek answers to, and, I am confident, resolve. There are so many new and old questions in economics to address that I am tempted to stop right now and put you all to work. Don't worry, I'm almost done, and the problem sets and exams are over, at least for now. But if you are looking for places to start, think about all the sources of new data at our fingertips. I don't mean to be the old person in the room today, but there was no Google Patents search tool, Twitter and Twitter API, or Python to scrape LinkedIn pages. There was just barely the internet and email, and I had an AOL email account when I was at Cal. I digress. The very important empirical revolution in economics is fully in swing, and many of your professors are significant contributors to it. During the pandemic, you could track comfort with social interactions using Open Table reservations. I don't have to tell you all how closely you can track rents in pricey Bay Area neighborhoods using tools like Zillow, Apartments.com, and Apartment List. These types of housing data inform the Federal Reserve's understanding of inflation. I am confident your generation will transform our capability to use high-frequency, real-time data, applying your unique perspectives to deepen our understanding of how our economy is evolving. I will leave you with this one last thought. Give greatest scope to your curiosity, your love of data, and your unique perspective, with special attention to where things no longer seem to be working as well as they used to. Seek out structural breaks, discontinuities, mysteries—things we just don't understand. Those are the hard questions. The ones where answers are most needed. I mentioned models earlier. Extend the ones we have and write down some new ones. We need them. Too many old models are, well, creaky and not serving us as well as they used to right now. And in uncertain environments, like post-Soviet Russia, it was better to count construction cranes dotting the skyline rather than input data that were neither valid nor reliable into a macro model developed for economies with functioning market systems. Build some new models, throw in some new data, and see what happens. In closing, it is an exciting, extraordinary time to be an economist, given the many unsettled questions in economics, the infinite and growing number of data sets, and the proliferation of useful tools and helpful means of collaboration. This empirical revolution does not exclude theory. We must continually refine our understanding of how various data sets, sectors of the economy, households, et cetera, interact with one another. Berkeley econ grads, it is my pleasure to now welcome you as colleagues. And as you follow your curiosity and put your toolkit to use, I will evoke Dr. Sadie T.M. Alexander again. One of her favorite sayings, which she clearly adhered to throughout her life, was "Knock those doors down!" This is my wish for you as you proceed to the world beyond Sather Gate, Sproul Plaza, and Evans Hall. Congratulations, again, Berkeley economics Class of 2023! Go change the world. Knock those doors down! I can't wait to see you do it! 1. See Sadie T.M. Alexander (1921), "The Standard of Living among One Hundred Negro Migrant Families in Philadelphia," Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Texas Bankers Association Annual Convention, San Antonio, Texas It is a pleasure to be here with you today.1I am especially pleased to participate in this event focused on "Building Stronger Communities." As a former banker, former state bank commissioner, and a member of the Federal Reserve Board that theme really resonates with me. We all know that a safe, sound, and fair financial industry built upon the dual banking system is the foundation of strong and stable communities. All throughout this great nation, and the state of Texas, community and regional banks provide financial services and essential credit to assist families and businesses achieve their dreams. Federal regulators, including the Federal Reserve, in partnership with state banking departments—like Commissioner Cooper and his team here in Texas—are responsible for ensuring that banks provide these services in accordance with consumer and safety and soundness laws. State bank regulators help to provide context and an understanding of the unique economic conditions that exist within Texas and within the different regions of the state. This context helps our supervisory teams at the Fed better understand the decisions that a bank's management might make in light of particular circumstances and market dynamics. Today, I thought I would spend some time following up on a few topics that I have been speaking about recently that provide some insight into the roles of policymakers and regulators, but most importantly highlighting the critical role of bankers in facilitating a strong economy. I will begin with bank supervision and risk-tailored bank regulation, and how I think about tailoring in the context of the recent bank failures and ongoing discussions about regulatory reform. I will then talk about the benefits ofnimblesupervision and how that approach supports a U.S. financial system with banks of all sizes in every community in every diverse region of this country. And finally, I will address the importance of ensuring that both banks and examiners are well prepared and positioned for potential stress in the banking market. Most importantly, though, I want to emphasize the role of due process in the Federal Reserve's bank supervision. We should not be remotely analyzing your bank and downgrading your rating without communication and justification. Due process requires formal engagement between examiners and the bank. If our examiners believe there is a reason to be concerned with the condition of your institution, the examiners should notify you and engage directly with you to make sure that they have a clear understanding of all of the facts, and that any supervisory actions—including any discussion of ratings downgrades—are appropriate based on the unique facts and circumstances of the institution. It's been a while since I've felt the need to say this to our state-chartered banks, but the time has come to renew this message today and to emphasize it going forward. I'm sure you are not surprised that our largest bank CEOs do not hesitate to engage directly with the Board and Reserve Bank presidents. I see one of my many functions and roles as a Member of the Board of Governors as providing that open door and opportunity for direct engagement with a policymaker for our regional and smaller banks, as well. Your Texas ABA executive, Chris Furlow, who is a long time friend and colleague, can put you directly in touch with me should you desire to do so. As a former banker, and bank commissioner, I know from experience that building a relationship is key to effective communication. And it's always better to have made that connection before you need it. I look forward to that opportunity to get to know each of you. Tailored Supervision and Regulation, and the Path Forward for ReformAs every banker in this room knows, tailoring is a critical aspect of the federal regulatory and supervisory framework. It has continued to be a core principle in strengthening bank oversight since the 2008 financial crisis. Over the years, as regulators refined and improved the regulatory and supervisory framework, the concept of tailoring has evolved. Overseeing banks based on their size, risk, business model, and complexity provides appropriate proportionality to our work. I've often said that risk-based supervision is itself a form of tailoring.2This approach to supervision and regulation, when it works effectively, allows us to focus supervisory attention on areas that pose the greatest risk. It also recommends differences in regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations, based on the size and complexity of the bank. It is simply common sense that what works well for the largest global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) is not appropriate for regional and community banks. Our tailored approach applies across many areas, including in the stringency and complexity of capital requirements and for regulatory reporting obligations. As regulators consider the appropriate response to the recent bank failures, a renewed focus on the role of tailoring has emerged. From my perspective, there are several important steps we must take. First, we must seriously consider the feedback from a variety of internal and external viewpoints to identify what went wrong. In my view, one of the most effective steps the Federal Reserve could take would be to engage an independent third party to analyze the events surrounding the failure of these banks, so that we can fully understand what led to the failures. Before making conclusions about appropriate responses going forward to address causal issues, we need accurate, impartial, and thorough information to inform the debate about what specifically may be needed to fix any problems in our supervision and regulatory framework. Second, supervisors must do a better job of focusing on and identifying key issues and risks to ensure they can be promptly remediated. It is imperative that bank management, the board of directors, and supervisors understand bank business models, and risks that may emerge to threaten that model. Where issues are identified, supervisors need to clearly explain the concerns, so that bank management can create a plan to address them. Regulators already have a comprehensive toolkit at their disposal to encourage issue resolution, and frankly, we need to use those tools appropriately, not create more tools because we failed to use the tools at our disposal. To be sure, we do need to consider whether there are necessary, appropriate adjustments to improve the bank regulatory and supervisory framework. But our focus in doing so must be concentrated on identified problems and risks with clearly defined goals and outcomes. We should avoid using these bank failures as a pretext to push for other, unrelated changes to bank regulation. But, as we engage in this exercise, I think we need to carefully consider both the strength of the current regulatory framework and the effective implementation of tailored supervision. On this last issue—as we consider making changes—we need to carefully consider how these proposals will incorporate tailoring of regulation and supervision—specifically when considering reforms. Are we in the same place today as we were at the onset of the 2008 financial crisis? Of course not. While we have seen stress in some parts of the banking system, overall the system is strong and resilient. U.S. banks have high levels of capital and liquidity, and banks of all sizes continue to support the economy. To a large degree, this strength comes from the work done at the direction of Congress, most recently pursuant to the bipartisan Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, which better aligned regulation with risk.3The strong set of laws and regulations we have today suggests that the problems in the banking system require a targeted solution, one focused on actual risks, on improvement of supervision and risk management, and on prompt remediation of supervisory issues. Not only is the current tailoring approach robust, it also results in efficiency. Tailoring distinguishes firms by size, risk, and complexity, and imposes appropriate regulatory requirements in light of these differences. The Board considers a number of factors when evaluating the largest firms, including size, cross-jurisdictional activity, reliance on short-term wholesale funding, off-balance sheet exposures, and nonbank assets. These characteristics, and the G-SIB scoring methodology more broadly, help distinguish the largest firms that pose the greatest risks from smaller and less systemic firms. Even for smaller firms, we have clear regulatory standards and thresholds to ensure that supervision is appropriately tailored for each institution. This framework provides appropriate scale for both regulators and for banks. It strikes the crucial balance between safety and soundness and ensuring that well-supervised and regulated banks are able to continue providing credit to their local and regional businesses and communities. Fundamentally, we should be careful not to undermine tailoring and risk-based supervision. While there were some clear lapses in the supervision of Silicon Valley Bank, our Fed supervisors and those with the other banking agencies are dedicated public servants who I am confident will embrace the lessons learned from the recent bank failures. We need to provide examiners with direction and support to promote safety and soundness in the banking system. The banks that recently failed were unique in their operations and business models. These failures alone do not justify layering on inefficient and overly complex supervision on a broad range of other banks. Nimble SupervisionOne reasonable expectation from the many reviews of the recent bank failures will likely be an analysis of and recommendation for changes in supervision. How do we prioritize these issues for improving risk-based supervision? How do we revise those priorities when underlying economic conditions evolve or banks begin to engage in new activities that present new risks? We will need to be sure that whatever approach we adopt, we devote sufficient supervisory attention to the areas of highest risk, while not hindering innovation. As I've briefly discussed today, we need to have a supervisory system that focuses appropriate attention on the traditional risks that are inherent to the business of banking: credit, liquidity, concentration, and interest rate risk. Historically, supervision has been an effective tool to address these traditional risks. Supervisors can make sure that banks are working to mitigate such risks with effective risk management and liquidity planning. As we consider changes to our framework, we need to understand potential unintended consequences and be mindful that we do not inhibit innovation so that banks remain competitive and well positioned to effectively serve the needs of their customers. It will continue to be a challenge to ensure the appropriate focus on traditional banking risks while encouraging innovation. But it can be accomplished if we approach it from the need for transparency, transparency by banks about their innovation activities and agenda, and transparency by regulators regarding supervisory expectations and emerging risks. Transparency can help us promote these dual objectives, maintaining a focus on traditional risks, while enabling banks to innovate in a safe and sound manner, with a clear understanding of our expectations. At the same time, failure to adopt a transparent approach can lead to adverse consequences for consumers, businesses, and communities by limiting banking products and services and pushing activities outside of the regulated banking system. We need to preserve regulatory support for innovation conducted safely and soundly consistent with applicable laws, including consumer protection. Promoting Bank ReadinessVoices calling for broad, fundamental reforms of the U.S. banking system appear to advocate a shift away from tailoring and risk-based supervision. The view that we extend the reach of overly complex and outsized regulatory requirements to banks that are smaller and less complex ignores some likely results—doing so will lead to bank consolidation, and will potentially push banking activities outside of the regulated banking system. This could also lead to the elimination of all but the largest too-big-to-fail banks who would then be insulated from other competition. This is surely not the outcome that supporters of the 2008 financials crisis reforms were seeking. It is also, in my mind, not the right approach. In a time of potential stress, we need to be forward focused on bank preparedness so that banks are positioned to address issues of concern. These include being prepared to address contingency funding needs, with a plan in place that has been tested and is ready to be executed. Regulators need to be supportive of this kind of planning. One of the preliminary lessons learned from the recent bank failures is that bank management, and their boards of directors, should be prepared to test the banks' ability to manage liquidity needs during times of stress. This is one area where I think bankers can make an important, immediate contribution. I strongly encourage bankers to consider creating a plan to handle liquidity needs during times of unexpected stress—and then test the ability to execute the plans. Adverse conditions can escalate quickly, and influences beyond a bank management's control, including irrational actors, can impact your business in very short order. For example, we know that a number of banks have not registered for or accessed the Federal Reserve's discount window. But if the bank plans include accessing discount window lending—even if the likelihood of that stress is extremely remote—it is critical to understand in advance the steps needed to be taken during the emergency. This could include testing the capacity to pledge collateral or even just contacting your local Reserve Bank to learn about or complete the necessary onboarding procedures. The Path ForwardMy views on the path forward are informed by serving as the bank commissioner for the state of Kansas as its lead regulator and supervisor, my experience as a banker, and especially by my service on the Board of Governors since 2018, during a time when the banking system has experienced many unique stresses including those associated with the COVID pandemic. There have already been some preliminary and expedited internal reports published on the failures of SVB and Signature Bank, and I fully expect to see additional reports and analysis of these failures, and the failure of First Republic, in the coming months.4These preliminary reviews are an important first step for the U.S. bank regulators working to identify root causes of these bank failures and holding themselves accountable for supervisory mistakes. There are additional steps that we can take. First, I believe that the Federal Reserve should engage an independent third party to prepare a report to supplement the limited internal review to fully understand the failure of SVB. This would be a logical next step in holding ourselves accountable and would help to eliminate the doubts that may naturally accompany any self-assessment prepared and reviewed by a single member of the Board of Governors.5This external independent report should also cover a broader time period, including the events of the weekend following the failure of SVB, and a broader range of topics beyond just the regulatory and supervisory framework that applied to SVB, including operational issues, if any, with discount window lending, Fedwire services, and with the transfer of collateral from the Federal Home Loan Banks. Second, I believe we need to do a better job identifying the most critical issues and moving quickly to remediate them. It is evident that both supervisors and bank management neglected key, long-standing risk factors that should be an area of focus in any examination. These include concentration risk, liquidity risk, and interest rate risk. We have the tools to address these issues, but we need to ensure that examiners focus on these core risks and are not distracted by novel activity or concepts. Finally, we should consider whether there are necessary—and targeted—adjustments we should make to banking regulation. This will likely include a broad range of topics, including taking a close look at deposit insurance reform, the treatment of uninsured deposits, and a reconsideration of current deposit insurance limits.6We should avoid using these bank failures as a pretext to push for other, unrelated changes to banking regulation. Our focus should be on remediating known, identified issues with bank supervision and issues that emerge from the public autopsy of these events. A debate about regulatory changes must also consider where we are today as compared to prior to the 2008 financial crisis. The banking system is strong and resilient despite recent banking stress. The Fed has refined regulatory standards over time at the direction of Congress, and through the "tailoring" regulations I discussed earlier that are designed to better align regulation with risk.7Even with the implementation of these changes, banks today are better capitalized, with more liquidity, and are subject to a new range of supervisory tools that did not exist prior to 2008. This banking system is not only strong today but is well prepared to continue supporting the provision of credit and the broader economy. Radical reform of the bank regulatory framework—as opposed to targeted changes to address identified root causes of banking system stress—is incompatible with the fundamental strength of the banking system. I am extremely concerned about calls for casting aside tiering expectations for less complex institutions, given the clear statutory direction to provide for appropriately calibrated requirements for these banks. I have also heard calls for broad, fundamental reforms for the past several years, shifting away from tailoring and risk-based supervision. I believe this is the wrong direction for any conversation about banking reform. The unique nature and business models of the banks that recently failed, in my view, do not justify imposing new, overly complex regulatory and supervisory expectations on a broad range of banks. If we allow this to occur, we will end up with a system of significantly fewer banks serving significantly fewer customers. Those who will likely bear the burden of this new banking system are those at the lower end of the economic spectrum, both individuals and businesses. The American economy relies on a broad and diverse range of businesses supported by a broad and diverse range of banks. Eliminating regional banks from the U.S. banking system would be devastating to businesses and communities across America. Especially in those regions whose communities are not sufficiently served by larger institutions. As I conclude, I want to reiterate that the banking system remains strong and resilient, and that bankers across Texas, and the United States, are deeply engaged in their work to support and build their local businesses and communities. It is imperative that going forward policymakers preserve a framework that supports a diverse and dynamic banking sector, with banks of all sizes that serve the needs of their unique customers wherever they are located. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. Michelle W. Bowman, "Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision (PDF)" (speech at the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, February 13, 2023).Return to text 3. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 4. See Government Accountability Office, "Bank Regulation: Preliminary Review of Agency Actions Related to March 2023 Bank Failures (PDF)" GAO-23-106736 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, April 2023); Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC's Supervision of Signature Bank (PDF)" (Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, April 28, 2023); Michael Barr, Vice Chair for Supervision of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank (PDF)" (April 28, 2023).Return to text 5. As noted in Vice Chair for Supervision Michael Barr's review of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, "[the] report was written with the benefit of hindsight on the particular facts and circumstances that proved most relevant for SVB and SVBFG. The report was prepared in a compressed time frame from March 13, 2023, through April 28, 2023, and further work over a longer period could draw additional or different conclusions." Barr,Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank.Return to text 6. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "Options for Deposit Insurance Reform (PDF)" (Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, May 1, 2023).Return to text 7. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Public Law No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: NongHyup Bank, Seoul, Korea, and NongHyup Bank, New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated January 17, 2017Terminated May 8, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: The Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto, Canada and Bank of Nova Scotia New York Agency, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated November 5, 2015 (PDF)Terminated May 18, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. The Federal Reserve Board on Monday issued itsEconomic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2022report, which examines the financial lives of U.S. adults and their families. Overall, the report shows that higher prices have negatively affected most households and overall financial well-being declined over the prior year, though workers continued to benefit from a strong labor market. The report draws from the Board's tenth annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, or SHED, which was conducted in October of last year. The report discusses findings related to financial well-being, income, expenses, employment, banking and credit, housing, retirement and investments, and higher education and student loans. The report, fact sheet, downloadable data, data visualizations, and a video summarizing the survey's findings are foundhere. The report indicates that self-reported financial well-being declined in 2022, in part reflecting ongoing concerns about higher prices. In the fourth quarter of 2022, 73 percent of adults reported either doing okay or living comfortably financially, down 5 percentage points from the previous year and among the lowest levels observed since 2016. Consistent with these changes in overall financial well-being, fewer adults reported having money left over after paying their expenses. Fifty-four percent of adults said that their budgets had been affected "a lot" by price increases. Parents living with children under age 18, Black adults, Hispanic adults, and those with a disability were more likely to say that their budgets had been affected "a lot" by higher prices. "The SHED results provide helpful insights into the economic well-being of Americans," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Michelle W. Bowman. "It is important that we continue to refine our understanding of the economic challenges facing U.S. households." The report also provides details on how people adjusted their financial behaviors in response to higher prices. Common strategies were using less of a product or stopping using it altogether, switching to a cheaper product; or delaying a major purchase. Fifty-one percent of adults reported that they reduced their savings in response to higher prices. Indicators of workers' opportunities for new positions and pay increases strengthened relative to 2021. The share who received a raise, asked for a raise, or voluntarily left a job increased over the prior year, while the share who lost a job decreased. For example, thirty-three percent of adults said they received a raise or promotion in the prior year, up 3 percentage points from 2021. Additionally, the share of adults who reported that they would cover a $400 emergency expense using cash or its equivalent was 63 percent. This was down 5 percentage points from a high in 2021. Thirteen percent of adults said they would be unable to pay the expense by any method, which was slightly higher than in the last survey. The survey included more than 11,000 adult respondents. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955. Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2022 (PDF) Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2022Fact Sheet (PDF) Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Interactive Charts
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition order against Shebrelia Jackson-DavisFormer employee of Ally Bank, Detroit, MichiganCoronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security, or CARES, Act loan fraud Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Perry County Bancorp Inc., Du Quoin, Illinois and Du Quoin State Bank, Du Quoin, IllinoisWritten Agreement dated April 26, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the 22nd Annual International Conference on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good afternoon, everyone. It is a pleasure to be here and share my perspective on some key challenges policymakers currently face. Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. This conference is timely and relevant. Among the topics covered are current financial stability risks and vulnerabilities, potential developments in banking supervision and regulation, and operational risk and resilience under evolving technologies. During the next three days, you will have an opportunity to engage in stimulating discussions with expert panelists on these and other critical issues. Today, I would like to share with you, at a high level, some of the Federal Reserve's recent and ongoing initiatives on a few of these issues. I also want to share with you an overview of the Federal Reserve's approach toward financial stability and my thoughts on interactions between the economic outlook and financial stability. My remarks will be U.S. focused, fully understanding that other countries monitor financial stability similarly and that the health of the U.S. economy and financial system has an impact on other countries, and vice versa. The Federal Reserve's Approach Toward Financial StabilityA stable financial system is resilient even in the face of sharp downturns or stress events. It provides households and businesses with the financing they need to participate and thrive in a well-functioning economy. It is difficult to anticipate or prevent shocks, but sound policies can mitigate their impact. At the Federal Reserve, we work hard to make sure that an initial shock in one area of the financial system does not spill over to other markets or institutions and cause severe or widespread strains. Such spillovers could disrupt the flow of credit and cause outsized declines in employment and economic activity. It is not our role, nor should it be our objective, to influence the allocation of credit within or across sectors of the U.S. economy. Financial and nonfinancial institutions and households are linked through a web of relationships. The economic activities of households and businesses depend on the strength of financial institutions' balance sheets, as households and businesses obtain funding through the financial sector. Similarly, the health of the financial sector hinges on the strength of the balance sheets of households, businesses, and financial institutions, as financial institutions' assets are the liabilities of these sectors. The Federal Reserve monitors and assesses potential vulnerabilities that may develop because of interactions among key participants. We do that by focusing on the safety and soundness of individual supervised institutions and by looking across the entire financial and nonfinancial system for potential risks and vulnerabilities. These risks and vulnerabilities can include elevated valuation pressures, excessive borrowing by households and businesses, excessive leverage in the financial system, and elevated funding risks. In other words, at the Federal Reserve, we use both microprudential and macroprudential approaches to monitor the health of financial institutions and the financial sector. The recent banking stress events remind us that risks and vulnerabilities in financial markets are continuously changing. That is why the staff at the Federal Reserve is constantly monitoring domestic and foreign financial markets and institutions, as well as the financial condition of households and businesses, with the goal of identifying current and future vulnerabilities. Such forward-looking financial stability monitoring helps inform policymakers about ongoing vulnerabilities in the financial system that may amplify a range of potential adverse events or shocks. The U.S. Financial System and Economic OutlookU.S. financial markets and institutions remain resilient even though financial stability risks and vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system have increased since the recent stress events. Conditions in the banking sector have stabilized thanks, in part, to decisive emergency actions taken in March by the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Treasury. The Federal Reserve, using existing regulatory and supervisory tools, is working to ensure that banks improve and update their liquidity, commercial real estate, and interest rate risk-management practices. I expect spending and economic growth to remain quite slow over the rest of 2023, due to tight financial conditions, low consumer sentiment, heightened uncertainty, and a decline in household savings that had built up after the onset of the pandemic. Inflation has come down substantially since last summer, but it is still too high, and by some measures progress has been decelerating recently, particularly in the core services sector. While it is reasonable to expect that the recent banking stress events will lead banks to tighten credit standards further, the amount of tightening and the magnitude of the effect such tightening might have on the U.S. economy is not yet clear, and this uncertainty complicates economic forecasts. Short-term interest rates are 5 percentage points higher than they were a little over a year ago. History shows that monetary policy works with long and variable lags, and that a year is not a long enough period for demand to feel the full effect of higher interest rates. While my base case forecast for the U.S. economy is not a recession, higher interest rates and lower earnings could test the ability of businesses to service debt. In addition, and perhaps more in focus given the recent events affecting certain areas of the banking sector, higher interest rates could further exacerbate stress at banking organizations, especially those that are highly exposed to longer-duration assets and have a relatively high ratio of uninsured deposits to total deposits. Since late last year, the Federal Open Market Committee has slowed the pace of rate hikes as we have approached a stance of monetary policy that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. A decision to hold our policy rate constant at a coming meeting should not be interpreted to mean that we have reached the peak rate for this cycle. Indeed, skipping a rate hike at a coming meeting would allow the Committee to see more data before making decisions about the extent of additional policy firming. With that said, let me turn to the topics covered in our two sessions this afternoon. Current Financial Stability Risks and VulnerabilitiesDuring the first session this afternoon, you will be discussing current financial stability risks and vulnerabilities as well as historical parallels. As we have seen in the past couple of months, the failure of a large banking organization, even if not deemed individually systemically important under our regulations, can cause markets to reassess the condition of other firms with roughly similar size and risk profiles, and the resulting spillovers can generate significant negative consequences for the broader economy. As I mentioned earlier, conditions in the banking sector have stabilized. Moreover, broader U.S. financial markets and the overwhelming majority of financial institutions have been resilient to the recent stress events. The resilience of the financial system to current salient risks can be appreciated by contrasting it to the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. Leading up to the Global Financial Crisis, housing markets were substantially overvalued, mortgage underwriting standards were weak, and home mortgages were at substantial risk of falling underwater if house prices fell. Yet banks had limited loss-absorbing capacity and were heavily reliant on wholesale short-term funding, and interconnections across the financial system were opaque. When housing markets weakened, opacity contributed to investors' fears, short-term funding pulled away, and excessive leverage led to fire sales as financial institutions experienced losses and major firms failed or were rescued by the government. The economy experienced a deep recession, and unemployment ultimately reached 10 percent. The current resilience of the financial sector points to substantially more limited spillovers from recent events. The failures of Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank showed excessive reliance at those institutions on uninsured deposits and excessive exposure to interest rate risk. Even so, the overwhelming majority of banks have strong balance sheets with limited leverage, high levels of loss-absorbing capacity, and healthy liquidity. Moreover, household and business balance sheets are generally strong, and the credit quality of loans is generally much better than on the eve of the Global Financial Crisis. Leverage across key parts of the financial sector, including especially the largest banks and broker-dealers, is much lower than in the mid-2000s. Even so, we remain vigilant to the potential for vulnerabilities to emerge. Three areas of potential concern have been the focus of our supervisory and regulatory work. First, recent stresses highlighted the importance of effective liquidity and interest rate risk management, including both reliance on uninsured deposits and exposure to duration risk in asset holdings. While the resilience of the financial sector will limit the spillovers from recent events, I expect those strains to lead to a further tightening in credit supply from banks that will weigh on economic activity. Second, it is also important to assess how changes in the financial sector, including expanded use of online banking and shifts in behavior that may be driven by access to social media, may alter the potential speed of deposit flows. Third, the weakness in some sectors of commercial real estate will affect the credit quality of those types of commercial real estate loans and thereby place strains on lenders with high concentrations of those loans. Changes in work preferences and the increase in remote work is leading to a reassessment of the outlook for office and associated retail properties, and it will take time for the extent of that weakness to become clearer. Ongoing Regulatory Capital InitiativesLater in the afternoon, during the second session of the conference, you will be discussing a few key ongoing regulatory capital initiatives, focusing on the completion of the Basel III reforms. As Vice Chair for Supervision Michael Barr has noted, finalizing the Basel III reforms is a high priority for the Federal Reserve. The revised framework should improve the resilience of the banking system by producing more robust and internationally consistent capital requirements for large firms, building on improvements made to the capital framework following the Global Financial Crisis. Importantly, the revised framework is expected to reduce unwarranted variability in capital requirements. By increasing standardization, these reforms aim to increase transparency and public confidence in risk-weighted assets while also reducing complexity. As we speak, the staffs of the U.S. federal banking agencies are diligently working on a Basel III endgame proposal that should be issued for public comment soon. At the same time, the Federal Reserve staff is considering ways to enhance the ability of stress tests to capture a wider range of risks and identify vulnerabilities at the largest banking organizations. ConclusionBased on this brief overview of the issues, this afternoon promises to be invigorating and informative. I look forward to hearing how the panel discussions go. I hope that you enjoy the conference. Thank you.
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the 2023 Santa Barbara County Economic Summit, University of California, Santa Barbara Economic Forecast Project, Santa Barbara, California (via webcast) Thank you, Peter, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I confess I am not an expert on Santa Barbara County's diverse economy, beyond my abiding interest in the excellent wines you produce. But you will hear more about the regional outlook from the other two speakers and so I'll focus my remarks on a broader perspective of the U.S. economy and how the data is shaping my policy views.1Let me cut to the chase—in my view, data since the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has not provided sufficient clarity as to what we should do with our policy rate at the next meeting. We still have some major data releases coming up in the next three weeks and I'll also be learning more about evolving credit conditions, both factors which will inform me on the best course of action. Between now and then, we need to maintain flexibility on the best decision to take in June. Starting with the economy, activity has slowed from its pace in the latter half of last year. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have grown at a modest rate last quarter, and different data available for the current quarter could be interpreted as suggesting growth is slowing or even accelerating a bit. Real GDP grew at an annual rate of 1.1 percent in the first three months of the year. The consensus of private sector forecasts tracked by the Blue Chip survey is for annualized growth of only a tenth of a percent or two above zero this quarter. By contrast, the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow projection, based on a range of data, is for a 2.9 percent growth rate. Retail sales and industrial production rose in April, though those gains followed two months of declining or flat readings. At the same time, April was the second month non-manufacturing businesses expanded modestly, according to respondents of the Institute for Supply Management survey. Despite this slowing in activity from last year, we have a very tight labor market and high inflation. We also are at a period of higher-than-usual uncertainty about how credit conditions are evolving in response to the recent bank failures and stress among some other mid-size banks. Let me talk about each of these three key issues and then conclude with how I see these factors playing into my June policy decision. A Very Tight Labor MarketThe employment report for April showed solid job growth, but previous months were revised downward by a significant amount. The unemployment rate fell slightly to 3.4 percent, reaching its low in recent years, which is the lowest since 1969. The labor force participation rate held steady in April after several months of increases. Average hourly earnings rose at their fastest pace this year, and, over the past 12 months, were up 4.4 percent, slightly higher than the yearly pace in March. These data suggest the labor market is still powering forward. However, there are some other signs that the labor market may be cooling. Temporary-help employment fell for the third straight month and is considerably down from last year. Some see this category as a leading indicator for overall employment, meaning we may see some softening in labor demand going forward. Furthermore, job vacancies declined by 384,000 in March, and the number of job vacancies for every person counted as looking for a job has declined to 1.6, down from the peak of 2 for every job seeker. This reduction is consistent with a softening in labor demand, but it is still far above the 1-to 1 ratio that was typical before the pandemic. Finally, the rate at which people are quitting jobs, a sign of confidence in the job market, has fallen and is in hailing distance of the level that persisted for the couple of years before the pandemic recession. As I have argued in other speeches, a loosening labor market, to help our fight against inflation, doesn't have to mean a recession or big job losses.2But we do need to see more loosening than we have seen to help take the heat off the inflation rate. Inflation Is Stubbornly HighLet's talk about where we are on inflation. The latest consumer price index (CPI) report showed that headline inflation fell from 5 percent year over year in March to 4.9 percent in April. But that decline was only due to rounding—the actual decrease was just five one-hundreds of a percentage point, from 4.98 percent to 4.93 percent. Almost no progress. The news on core inflation was similar. Core CPI inflation excludes food and energy and is usually a better guide to the underlying trend for prices. Core was up 5.5 percent in April from a year before and has been more or less steady in 2023. It is only a bit down from around 6 percent a year ago. Whether measured on a three month, six-month or 12-month basis, it is running too high. Likewise, narrower definitions of inflation intended to filter out fluctuations in some prices show little progress in the past year. Six of seven of these alternative measures created by different parts of the Federal Reserve System show inflation running between 4 and more than 5 percent over the past year or so.3 Bottom line, I am concerned about the lack of progress in any and all of these measures, and I have a couple specific concerns about some important components of inflation. First, core goods prices, which were among the biggest factors that drove the escalation in inflation the past two years, aren't slowing or retreating as much as we need to get inflation down closer to our 2 percent target. We're hoping there will be a continued slowdown in goods price increases, but we aren't seeing deflation in this category like we had pre-pandemic. A second concern is rent increases, which accounts for most of a category called housing services and is a sizable component of inflation. Lower rent increases from lease renewals last year are slowly making their way into the inflation data, but most recently, a rebound in the housing market is raising questions about how sustained those lower rent increases will be. While housing prices actually have less of a short-term effect on rents than one might think, this upturn in the housing market, which comes even with significantly higher mortgage rates, has raised questions about whether the benefit from the slowing in rent increases will last as long as we have been expecting. Lastly, as I think of the service category of inflation, I look to how wages are growing, since labor is a large input into production. Though some measures of wage increases have begun to slow, I am concerned that inflation won't be coming down very much unless average hourly earnings decelerate from the most recent level of 4.4 percent to a pace a lot closer to 3 percent.4 On Friday, we will be getting April inflation data based on personal consumption expenditures and then May CPI data on the first day of the FOMC meeting. These are two critical pieces of data I will be looking at between now and the June FOMC meeting to learn more about inflation dynamics and if we are seeing some easing in inflation pressures. Uncertainty about Credit ConditionsTurning to banking conditions, I want to emphasize that overall, the banking system is sound and resilient, with strong capital and liquidity. In response to the recent stress, the Federal Reserve, working with the Treasury Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, took decisive action to strengthen confidence in the banking system. Employing financial stability tools in response to liquidity pressures allows us to continue to focus on setting monetary policy to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Monetary policy works in large part by setting the target range for the federal funds rate, and this rate transmits to market interest rates and affects household and business saving, spending, and investment decisions. So, the FOMC has been raising the target range for the federal funds rate over the past year with the goal to slow demand for goods, services and labor to bring them into better alignment with supply and put downward pressure on inflation. Financial conditions can also tighten from non-monetary policy developments. And there has been a lot of discussion about how the recent banking stresses may tighten credit conditions. If lending does slow, this can obviate the need for at least some monetary policy tightening. It is important to account for this other form of tightening in setting the stance of monetary policy. If not considered appropriately, the Fed could tighten too much and needlessly raise the risk of a recession. I am monitoring how credit conditions may be changing, both interest rates and non-rate conditions, such as the number of new loans, the size of loans, and the lending terms. Since the bank failures in mid-March, the Fed's survey of bank loan officers in April showed some moderate tightening of lending conditions to firms over the previous three months, with somewhat more tightening for lending to smaller firms. Officers for many of the banks in the survey said they expected lending conditions to continue to tighten further in 2023. Lending conditions had tightened significantly already since 2021, and it is hard to tell whether the actual and expected incremental tightening in standards in this survey was more of the same or related to the banking stress. In addition to the Fed survey, a variety of financial market participants over the past few weeks have also reported that credit tightening is expected to continue. They are not suggesting a credit crunch but are concerned that it could happen, and they say it isn't yet clear how banking terms and conditions will evolve. There are a wide range of estimates trying to map this expected credit tightening into policy rate hikes. As of today, it isn't clear to me what the effect on the economy will be. Implications for Monetary PolicyLet me turn to the implications for monetary policy. There is a lot of discussion about the next step for policy. There are three options: hike, skip, or pause. Let me outline reasons why each of these options may be appropriate. One might lean toward hiking by focusing on the economic data and interpreting it to suggest that inflation and economic activity are not consistent with significant and ongoing progress toward the FOMC's 2 percent inflation goal. Based solely on the data we have in hand as of today, we are not making much progress on inflation. If one doesn't believe the incoming data will be much better, one could advocate for another 25-basis-point hike as the appropriate action in June. Alternatively, one might view the current and incoming data as supporting a hike in June but believe that caution is warranted because there is a high level of uncertainty about how credit conditions are evolving. Another hike combined with an abrupt and unexpected tightening of credit conditions may push the economy down in a rapid and undesirable manner. This possibility is the downside risk of an additional rate hike in the current environment. If one is sufficiently worried about this downside risk, then prudent risk management would suggest skipping a hike at the June meeting but leaning toward hiking in July based on the incoming inflation data. There is a little over a month between the June and July FOMC meetings, and during that time we will learn more about how credit conditions are evolving. Over four months will have passed between the Silicon Valley Bank failure and the July meeting. By then we will have a much clearer idea about credit conditions. If banking conditions do not appear to have tightened excessively, then hiking in July could well be the appropriate policy. Lastly, one might want to pause hikes at the June meeting, meaning that the target range is at its terminal rate, if the current stance of policy is thought to be enough to bring inflation down over time. Between policy lags and possible tightening credit conditions, the current stance of monetary policy may be seen, at that point, as sufficiently restrictive to move us toward the dual mandate. From this viewpoint, the policy rate is high enough and we simply need to hold it there to bring inflation down toward our 2 percent target. I do not expect the data coming in over the next couple of months will make it clear that we have reached the terminal rate. And I do not support stopping rate hikes unless we get clear evidence that inflation is moving down towards our 2 percent objective. But whether we should hike or skip at the June meeting will depend on how the data come in over the next three weeks. We will get additional labor market data, with some information about wages, and additional inflation numbers in the next few weeks that will continue to shape my view on where we stand relative to the FOMC's dual mandate. During this time, I'll also be reviewing data on credit conditions to evaluate how much potential tightening is coming from the banking sector. Fighting inflation continues to be my priority. We worked very hard over the past year to quickly raise the target range for the federal funds rate from near zero to about 5 percent. While we are seeing some tentative signs of cooling in the labor market, I am determined to continue to use our policy tools as needed to appropriately bring inflation down to 2 percent. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller (2022), "Responding to High Inflation, with Some Thoughts on a Soft Landing," speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability Distinguished Lecture, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany, May 30.Return to text 3. See Kevin L. Kliesen (2023), "Measures of 'Trend' Inflation," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Economic Synopses,April 18.Return to text 4. Of course, I want to see wages grow. But wage growth needs to be at levels that are consistent with our two percent inflation goal. Otherwise, wage gains will be outstripped by inflation and families effectively will have less take home pay.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from April 10 through May 3, 2023. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on May 2–3, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMay 2-3, 2023:HTML|PDF
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the "How to Get Back on Track: A Policy Conference," Hoover Institution, Stanford, California Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you to the organizers for inviting me to speak. It is a pleasure to be here. I welcome hearing diverse views on how to best conduct monetary policy, and this conference is certainly providing an invigorating debate on that topic. Before I begin, I want to address quickly some news from this morning. I am deeply honored by the trust President Biden and Vice President Harris have shown me with the nomination to be the next Vice Chair of the Board. I am humbled by this extraordinary opportunity and thankful to my colleagues, friends, and family for their support. Turning back to the conference, as I join this debate, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. IntroductionThe title of the conference "How to Get Back on Track: A Policy Conference" is potent. Its intent and ambiguity are striking. First, the title presupposes that U.S. monetary policy is currently on the wrong track. Second, the webpage for this conference advances a puzzling definition of the phrase "on track." How so? According to the Hoover webpage, "A key goal of the conference is to examine how to get back on track and, thereby, how to reduce the inflation ratewithoutslowing down economic growth" (emphasis added).1As this audience knows, there are macroeconomic models that permit disinflation withnoslowdown in economic growth, but the assumptions underlying these models are very strong.2It's not clear, at least to me, why such a strict metric would be used to assess real-world monetary policymaking. Third, the definition of "on track" in the title contrasts with more commonplace definitions such as "achieving or doing what is necessary or expected," as offered by a standard reference such as the Merriam-Webster dictionary.3My view is that this commonplace definition provides a more practical lens through which to assess real-world policymaking. Against this semantic backdrop, I will begin my remarks with my perspective on the current inflation and economic situation. Then, I will consider credit conditions in response to the recent bank stress events. Next, I will offer some normative thoughts about strategic monetary policymaking in highly uncertain environments. Finally, I will argue that if you are willing to widen your lens to include a more commonplace definition, then it is possible to conclude that current monetary policy is, in fact, "on track." Current Inflation in the U.S.Current inflation is still high.Figure 1illustrates this point. Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, the black line, stands at 4.2 percent, and core PCE inflation, the red line, stands at 4.6 percent for year-end March 2023. Overall, news on inflation so far this year has been mixed. The good news is that food and energy prices both fell in March, and total PCE inflation slowed to 4.2 percent from 5 percent in February. Since peaking last June, inflation has declined about 2.75 percentage points—with nearly all the step-down explained by falling energy prices and slowing food prices. The bad news is that there has been little progress on core inflation. To understand why, I find it useful to separately analyze three large categories that together make up core PCE: goods excluding food and energy, the red line in figure 2; housing services, the black line; and services excluding housing and energy, the blue dashed line. The drivers of inflation in each of these sectors differ somewhat and understanding the different causes and how they affect the different components can help predict the future course of inflation. Core goods inflation, the red line infigure 2, has come down since its peak of 7.6 percent in February 2022, but the most recent news has been discouraging. Outside of used motor vehicle prices, which fell unexpectedly in March, disinflation in core goods prices is occurring at a slower pace than expected. Supply and demand imbalances in the goods sector seem to be resolving less quickly than expected. Core housing services inflation, the black line in figure 2, surged over the past couple of years as demand in the housing sector underwent a major shift during the pandemic. The latest monthly readings have started to slow, though that is not yet evident in the 12-month changes shown in figure 2. The recent slowing was presaged by a flattening out of rents on new leases to new tenants since the middle of last year. In contrast, core services excluding housing inflation, the blue dashed line in figure 2, has not shown much sign of slowing. Labor Market and GDP GrowthTurning to labor markets, the April 2023 employment report data continue to point to a strong labor market amid improvements in labor supply, with the prime-age labor force participation rate exceeding its pre-pandemic level. Wage growth has continued to run ahead of the pace consistent with 2 percent inflation and current trends in productivity growth. Wage gains are welcome as long as they are consistent with price stability. Over the 12 months ended in March 2023, the employment cost index (ECI) for total hourly compensation for private-sector workers rose 4.8 percent, down only a little from its peak of 5.5 percent last June. Despite strong growth in consumption spending, gross domestic product (GDP) grew modestly at an annual rate of 1.1 percent in the first quarter of 2023 as inventory investment slowed down substantially, similar to the below-trend pace of growth in 2022. Looking ahead, last quarter's growth in consumer spending seems unsustainable. Indeed, after rising very steeply in January 2023, consumer spending ticked down in February and was flat in March. Moreover, I expect slower consumer spending growth over the remainder of the year in response to tight financial conditions, depressed consumer sentiment, greater uncertainty, and declines in overall household wealth and excess savings. Recent Stress in the Banking SectorThe tightening in financial conditions we have seen in response to our monetary policy actions is likely to be augmented by the effects on credit conditions from recent strains in the banking sector. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. The Federal Reserve, working with other agencies, has taken decisive actions to protect the U.S. economy. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to expect that recent stress events will lead banks to tighten credit standards further.4Even though it is too early to tell, my view is that these incremental credit restraints will have a mild retardant effect on economic growth because the recent bank failures were isolated and addressed swiftly by aggressive macro- and micro-prudential policy actions. Nevertheless, I acknowledge that there is significant uncertainty around the amount of tightening of credit conditions in the coming year in response to the bank stress and the magnitude of the effect that tightening might have on the U.S. economy. Therefore, there is some downside risk that the incremental effect of the credit shock is larger than I expect. Monetary Policymaking and Current UncertaintiesThe pandemic aftermath, geopolitical instability, and banking-sector stress have contributed to a highly uncertain economic environment. Additionally, the numerous post-pandemic "surprises" in inflation, employment, and economic growth suggest that the underlying structure of the U.S. economy may be in flux. More simply, the data-generating process for the post-pandemic U.S. macroeconomy is less clear. Due to the proximity of the pandemic and its unprecedented disruptions of economic and social activity, there are currently insufficient post-pandemic data to identify the parameters and stable relationships that characterize the possible new structure of the economy. Given this observation, what is a reasonable monetary policymaking strategy? The answer to this question is likely to be different for each monetary policymaker. I want to share with you a few strategic principles that are important to me. First, policymakers should be ready to react to a wide range of economic conditions with respect to inflation, unemployment, economic growth, and financial stability. The unprecedented pandemic shock is a good reminder that under extraordinary circumstances it will be difficult to formulate precise forecasts in real time. Our dual mandate from the Congress is especially helpful here. It provides the foundation for all our policy decisions. Second, policymakers should clearly communicate monetary policy decisions to the public. Our commitment to transparency should be evident to the public, and monetary policy should be conducted in a way that anchors longer-term inflation expectations. Third—and this is where I am revealing my passion for econometrics—policymakers should continuously update their priors about how the economy works as new data become available. In other words, it is appropriate to change one's perspective as new facts emerge. In this sense, I am in favor of a Bayesian approach to information processing. While these principles do not constitute a complete monetary policymaking framework, I think they are useful when thinking about features of such frameworks. ConclusionBy way of concluding, I would like to return to the question of whether current monetary policy is "on track" but allow for the wider defining lens of "achieving or doing what is necessary or expected." The national unemployment rate was 3.6 percent in March 2022 when the current monetary policy tightening cycle began. Today, after 500 basis points of tightening of the policy rate, the national unemployment rate stands at a near-record low of 3.4 percent. At its recent peak, total PCE inflation was 7 percent in June 2022. Currently, it is 4.2 percent in March 2023. Is inflation still too high? Yes. Has the current disinflation been uneven and slower than any of us would like? Yes. But my reading of this evidence is that we are "doing what is necessary or expected" of us. Furthermore, monetary policy affects the economy and inflation with long and varied lags, and the full effects of our rapid tightening are still likely ahead of us. We are balancing the directives of the dual mandate given to us by the U.S. Congress. This is not an easy task in these uncertain times, but I can assure you that I and my colleagues on the FOMC take it quite seriously and with great humility. It is in this sense that I believe that we are well "on track." Thank you. ReferencesCroushore, Dean (1992)."What Are the Costs of Disinflation?" (PDF)Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,Business Review,May/June, pp. 3–15. Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King (2005). "The Incredible Volcker Disinflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 52 (July), pp. 981–1015. Sargent, Thomas J. (1982). "Stopping Moderate Inflations: The Methods of Poincare and Thatcher," in Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Henrique Simonsen (eds.),Inflation, Debt, and Indexation(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 54–96. Tetlow, Robert J. (2022)."How Large Is the Output Cost of Disinflation?"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-079 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). 1. See the conference's webpage atwww.hoover.org/events/how-get-back-track-policy-conference.Return to text 2. Estimates of the cost of disinflation depend on the model used to measure it. Classical models, in which rational expectations play a dominant role in determining the cost of disinflation, show low cost, while Keynesian models, in which slack in the economy is needed to reduce inflation, show high cost. See, for example, Sargent (1982), Croushore (1992), Goodfriend and King (2005), and Tetlow (2022) for a comparison of the cost of disinflation across macroeconomic forecasting models.Return to text 3. See the definition for "track" at https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/on%20track.Return to text 4. The April 2023 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) shows that banks, especially small and midsize banks, reported further tightening in credit standards on loans to businesses and households over the past three months, following widespread tightening in previous quarters. The April 2023 SLOOS is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos/sloos-202304.htm.Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Financial Services Committee, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Barr submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on May 18, 2023. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. Overall, the U.S. banking system remains strong and resilient, and depositors should be confident that all deposits in our banking system are safe. At the same time, recent stress in the banking system shows the need for us to be vigilant as we assess and respond to risks. My review of Silicon Valley Bank's (SVB) failure demonstrates that there are weaknesses in regulation and supervision that must be addressed, and I am committed to doing so.1I am also committed to maintaining the strength and diversity of the banking system so that it can continue to provide financial services and access to credit for households and businesses. As we consider adjustments to our rules and supervisory practices, I am sensitive to how changes may affect banks in the current economic environment. Accompanying my testimony today is the Federal Reserve'sSupervision and Regulation Report.I am also submittingmy reportthat examines the factors that led to the failure of SVB, including the role of the Federal Reserve. My testimony will offer an overview of banking conditions, the findings of the review, and opportunities for strengthening the Federal Reserve's regulatory and supervisory framework. Banking ConditionsLet me begin with conditions in the banking system. Overall, banks have strong capital and liquidity, enabling them to lend and provide financial services to households and businesses. At the same time, recent stress in the banking system shows the need for us to be vigilant as we assess and respond to risks. The recent failures of three large U.S. banks have also demonstrated the risks of concentrated funding sources and poor management of interest rate risks. As interest rates have risen, fair values of investment securities have declined significantly. Deposit costs have also increased from low levels, and firms are turning to wholesale borrowings to address emerging funding needs. Delinquency rates for some loan segments have started to increase from the low levels seen over the past several years. Banks have increased provisions for credit losses in anticipation of asset quality deterioration. Accordingly, supervisors are redoubling their efforts to assess banks' preparedness for emerging credit, liquidity, and interest rate risks. SVB ReviewLet me turn to the SVB review. Immediately following SVB's failure, I led a review of the Federal Reserve's supervision and regulation of the bank. Staff who were not involved in the supervision of SVB conducted the review. The resulting report takes an unflinching look at the conditions that led to the bank's failure, including the role of Federal Reserve supervision and regulation. There are four key takeaways from the report. First, SVB's board of directors and management failed to manage the bank's risks. The bank tripled in size between 2019 and 2021—expanding from $71 billion to $211 billion—as the rise in tech and venture capital activity led to growth in uninsured deposits, which the bank then invested largely in held-to-maturity securities. As the bank grew, its board and management failed to effectively oversee the risks inherent in the bank's concentrated business model and high level of reliance on uninsured deposits. The bank repeatedly failed its own liquidity tests, and SVB responded, in part, by changing the assumptions that determined its liquidity needs. The bank also mismanaged its interest-rate risk. Its senior leadership focused on short-term profits, removed interest-rate hedges that would have helped to protect the bank in a rising rate environment, and ignored multiple breaches of long-term interest-rate-risk limits. The second key takeaway is that Federal Reserve supervisors did not fully appreciate the extent of the vulnerabilities as SVB grew in size and complexity. This meant that SVB remained well-rated through the summer of 2022, even as significant risk to the bank's safety and soundness were growing. The third key takeaway is that when supervisors did identify vulnerabilities, they did not take sufficient steps to ensure that the bank fixed those problems quickly enough. When SVB became subject to heightened supervision in the large and foreign banking organization, or LFBO, portfolio in 2021, it was clear to supervisors that there were serious problems at the bank. However, Federal Reserve regulations provided SVB with a long runway to meet higher standards, and the bank entered the LFBO portfolio with a default view as satisfactory, which led examiners to wait to accumulate evidence to impose a lower rating. Yet supervisors found many serious problems: when the bank failed, it had 31 unaddressed safety and soundness supervisory findings—triple the number of peer banks. Overall, the supervisory approach at SVB was too focused on the continued accumulation of supporting evidence in an environment for supervision that emphasized consensus. Finally, the fourth key takeaway is that the Federal Reserve Board's tailoring approach in response to the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act and a shift in the stance of supervisory policy impeded effective supervision by reducing standards, increasing complexity, and promoting a less assertive supervisory approach. Absent these changes, SVB would have been subject to supervision within the LFBO portfolio and subject to heightened standards beginning in 2019—throughout the bank's period of rapid growth. While higher supervisory and regulatory requirements may not have prevented SVB's failure, they would have meant that the bank had stronger risk management and more financial resources to weather the stress. The four key takeaways show failures by SVB's board and senior management and failures by the Federal Reserve. It is crucial that we address those failures. Next, I will outline how we can strengthen both our supervision and regulation based on what we have learned and based on the Federal Reserve's existing authorities. I highlight a few examples below. Lessons Learned from SVB's FailureTo start, SVB's failure confirms the importance of strong levels of bank capital. While the proximate cause of SVB's failure was a liquidity run, the underlying issue was concern about its solvency—the bank's ability to absorb the losses on its securities and repay its depositors and other creditors. We should be humble about our ability—and that of bank managers—to predict how losses might be incurred, how future financial stress might unfold, and what the effect of financial stress might be on the financial system and our broader economy. Stronger capital will guard against the risks that we may not fully appreciate today and reduce the costs of bank failures. A second key lesson is that SVB's distress proved to have broader consequences for the banking system, even though SVB was not extremely large, highly connected to other financial counterparties, or involved in critical financial services. We need to reconsider the requirements that apply to banks based on size and risk. With respect to capital, we need to evaluate whether our capital requirements appropriately measure the ability of banks to absorb losses. Had SVB been required to reflect declines in the face value of available-for-sale securities in its capital, it may have held more capital to cover these losses. Any rule changes such as these that we might propose would not be effective for several years because of the standard notice and comment rulemaking process and would be accompanied by an appropriate phase-in. We also should evaluate how we supervise and regulate a bank's management of interest-rate risk. While interest-rate risk is a core risk of banking that is not new to banks or supervisors, SVB did not appropriately manage its interest-rate risk, and supervisors did not force the bank to fix these issues quickly enough. In addition, we should evaluate how we supervise and regulate liquidity risk, starting with the risks of uninsured deposits. For instance, liquidity requirements and models used by both banks and supervisors should better capture the liquidity risk of a firm's uninsured deposit base. We should also consider applying standardized liquidity requirements to a broader set of banks. Any adjustments to our rules would, of course, go through normal notice and comment rulemaking and have appropriate transition periods. In addition, our oversight of incentive compensation for bank managers should also be improved. SVB's senior management responded to the poor incentives approved by its board of directors; they were not compensated to manage the bank's risk, and they did not do so effectively. Speed, Force, and Agility of SupervisionI also plan to improve the speed, force, and agility of supervision. Supervisors did not fully appreciate the extent of the vulnerabilities as SVB grew in size and complexity, and when supervisors did identify vulnerabilities, they did not take sufficient steps to ensure that SVB fixed those problems quickly enough. Supervision should intensify at the right pace as a bank grows in size or complexity. Within our supervisory structure, there should be more continuity between the portfolios for banks of different sizes and risk so that a bank is ready to comply with heightened regulatory and supervisory standards more quickly. We also need to be especially attentive to the particular risks that banks with rapid growth, concentrated business models, or other special factors might pose regardless of asset size. Once identified, issues should be addressed more quickly, both by the bank and by supervisors. Today, for example, the Federal Reserve generally does not require additional capital or liquidity beyond regulatory requirements for a bank with inadequate capital planning, liquidity risk management, or governance and controls. I believe that needs to change in appropriate cases. Higher capital or liquidity requirements can serve as an important safeguard until risk controls improve, and they can focus management's attention on the most critical issues. Moreover, we need to ensure we have a culture that empowers supervisors to act in the face of uncertainty. Supervisors should be encouraged to evaluate risks with rigor and consider a range of potential shocks and vulnerabilities so that they think through the implications of tail events with severe consequences. ConclusionI want to reiterate that the banking system remains strong and resilient. Recent events demonstrate that we—as regulators—must do better. We need to ensure that we have strong supervision and regulation to make the financial system safer and fairer, in support of an economy that serves the needs of households and businesses. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1. This testimony uses "Silicon Valley Bank (SVB)" to refer to both the state member bank, Silicon Valley Bank, and its bank holding company, SVB Financial Group.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 21st Annual Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States, European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany It is a pleasure to be with you here today.1This symposium, focused on building the financial system of the twenty-first century, is very timely. Given the recent banking system stress many are welcoming a fresh look at whether the Dodd-Frank era changes to the financial system and the approach to supervision and regulation have kept pace with the evolving nature of banking, the evolving culture of banking, and how the risks of bank runs today have evolved to be meaningfully different from what we've seen in the past. While my remarks will largely focus on the United States, the lens through which regulators and policymakers should view these issues has some broader applicability and is worthy of an ongoing discussion. I will begin by offering a few thoughts on U.S. monetary policy. At our most recent meeting last week, in light of the ongoing unacceptably high inflation, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) increased the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. With this increase, the FOMC has raised the federal funds rate by 5 percentage points since March of last year. These increases, combined with the runoff of our balance sheet, are having the desired effect of tightening financial conditions. In my view, our policy stance is now restrictive, but whether it is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down remains uncertain. Some signs of slowing in aggregate demand, lower numbers of job openings and more modest gross domestic product (GDP) growth indicate that we have moved into restrictive territory. But inflation remains much too high, and measures of core inflation have remained persistently elevated, with declining unemployment and ongoing wage growth. And, as senior loan officers signaled beginning last summer, credit has continued to tighten.2I expect this trend will continue given increased bank funding costs and reduced levels of liquidity. While the U.S. banking and financial system remains sound and resilient, the recent failures of three U.S. banks with unique risk profiles have added to the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. This uncertainty is further complicated by stock price movements among regional banks. Should inflation remain high and the labor market remain tight, additional monetary policy tightening will likely be appropriate to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy to lower inflation over time. I also expect that our policy rate will need to remain sufficiently restrictive for some time to bring inflation down and create conditions that will support a sustainably strong labor market. Of course, the economic outlook is uncertain and our policy actions are not on a preset course. I will consider the incoming economic and financial data during the intermeeting period and its implications for the economic outlook in determining my view of the appropriate stance of monetary policy. I will look for signs of consistent evidence that inflation is on a downward path when considering future rate increases and at what point we will have achieved a sufficiently restrictive stance for the policy rate. In my view, the most recent CPI and employment reports have not provided consistent evidence that inflation is on a downward path, and I will continue to closely monitor the incoming data as I consider the appropriate stance of monetary policy going into our June meeting. My remarks today will address the recent bank failures in the United States and how the evolution of the banking industry has influenced and amplified bank deposit run risk. I will then discuss supervision, regulation, bank management culture, and technology, and how each of these changes the dynamics of our approach to building a stronger and more resilient financial system. Finally, I will close with my views on the importance of approaching the future in a deliberate, evidence focused, and thoughtful manner. The Evolving Context of Banking and Bank FailuresThose who are involved in the business of banking will not find this shocking, but it is a fundamental fact that banking involves risk. It is inherent in, and foundational to, the business of banking: banks take demand deposits—a short-term liability—and make term loans—creating a long-term asset. Absent this intentional risk-taking, banks could not play their indispensable role of credit provision in the economy. There are many other risks, with the specific risks that banks face today as varied as the wide range of bank business models. The most fundamental banking risks include credit, concentration, interest rate, liquidity, cybersecurity, more recently operational risk and, of course, the risk of contagion. Banking simply cannot work in its current and historical form without risk, so unless the goal is to change the nature of banking, the task of policymakers and regulators isnotto eliminate risk from the banking system, but rather to ensure that risk is appropriately and effectively managed. Fundamentally, this is the basis for the bank regulatory frameworks that exist around the world. In countries with well-functioning and appropriately regulated banking systems, banks serve an indispensable role in credit provision and economic stability. The goal is to create and maintain a system that supports prudent banking practices, and results in the implementation of appropriate risk management. No efficient banking system can eliminate all bank failures. But well-designed and well-maintained systems can limit bank failures and mitigate the harm caused by any that occur. In practice, the "maintenance" of the bank regulatory and supervisory framework has often been challenging, in part because maintenance requires vigilance in responding to evolving circumstances and risks. Lapses in this effort are revealed when something breaks, which could include fragilities resulting from the emergence of unidentified risks and financial stability threats; banking practices that expose shortcomings in the supervisory framework; or policymakers, regulators, and/or examiners who have lost sight of the fundamental goal of encouraging prudent banking practices and appropriate risk management. The need for maintenance of the U.S. bank regulatory and supervisory framework has come into stark relief with the failures of two large banks in March, followed by a third at the beginning of May. The future and current policy choices made in responding to these failures will have important consequences for the U.S. banking system. Including the extent to which bank regulation will continue to drive banking activities from regulated banks and into shadow banks. While shoring up the resiliency of the banking sector is important, it is also important that we consider the consequences of any regulatory change. Before discussing the direction of policy, I think it's imperative that we pause and consider where we are and what has changed. The Failure of Silicon Valley BankAs financial services have evolved to meet the demands and expectations of sophisticated and wealthy businesses and individuals, risks inherent in the very nature of these services—instant accessibility and transferability of funds—created the potential for instability at an extensive and accelerated scale. For Silicon Valley Bank in particular, while the run was ignited by traditional concerns, it was much faster than previous bank runs, was fueled by the most modern communication methods and social media, and was enabled through new technology that allows customers to move money on a scale and at a velocity not previously accessible directly to customers. On Thursday, March 9, SVB experienced a deposit outflow of more than $40 billion, and more than $100 billion was anticipated in queue for outflow on Friday, March 10. Let's consider this in comparison to past bank failures and the pace and size of deposit outflows. Prior to SVB, the largest bank failure in U.S. history was the failure of Washington Mutual, which experienced two periods of large deposit outflows, the first lasted 23 days with outflows of $9.1 billion, and the second $18.7 billion over 16 days.3In other bank failures resulting from deposit runs, deposits flowed out of the bank in significantly smaller volumes and over much longer time horizons than SVB experienced on March 9 and 10.4 The recent bank runs have many familiar elements. SVB relied on funding from extremely large deposits of technology and health care sector firms, which were mostly uninsured (more than 95 percent) and held in transaction accounts. In traditional banking, uninsured depositors have historically been exposed to credit risk on their bank deposits, which provides some incentive for them to impose market discipline on the bank, such as by discouraging excessive risk-taking. As we were very recently reminded, a disproportionate percentage of uninsured depositors can also present risk, since they may have strong incentives to withdraw their funds at the slightest sign of actual or perceived bank stress. These dynamics and incentives are certainly not new but have featured prominently in past bank runs.5 The most significant shift has been one of speed. This is where modern technology has played a significant role, both in facilitating the transfer of funds and in the access to, and expedited flow of, information among depositors. Evolving Technology and Customer ExpectationsBack-end money transfer systems have been gradually shifting to real-time payments, which are immediately available to customers upon transfer, rather than being subject to a waiting period while it is processed between financial institutions. Many bank websites provide capabilities that appear to allow customers to initiate funds transfers in real time. Sophisticated customers that hold uninsured deposits also have tools at their disposal—like the ability to initiate wire transfers between financial institutions—that allow faster transfers of funds. The capacity to initiate transfers, and even the changed perceptions of customers that they can move their funds at any time of day or night, have caused important structural shifts. Large depositors may have less incentive to act as a force for market discipline, even for banks where they hold large uninsured deposits in their operational accounts. These depositors have a cheaper and more efficient mechanism at their disposal to protect against credit risk—they can pull their money out in banking's new normal. These changes have exacerbated the potential flight risks of uninsured deposits, while changing some of the incentives for depositors imposing market discipline. Bank Runs and the Rumor MillThe speed and size of deposit withdrawals were a feature, not a cause, of the recent U.S. bank failures. We live in a world where a wide array of communication tools—text messaging, group chats, and social media postings—have enabled expedited, if not always more accurate, dissemination of information. The spread of information has always played an important role in bank confidence and bank runs. When information is more readily and quickly accessible and shared among shareholders, creditors, customers, and depositors, bank management needs to be attuned to how it communicates, especially when remediating identified weaknesses. The failure of SVB illustrates this dynamic. Uninsured depositors were connected by a closely linked network of business relationships and contacts, and strong ties with venture capital fund investors. The flow of information among these depositors—and the mechanisms that pushed them to act collectively—seem apparent in retrospect, but the closely linked relationships among this group exacerbated the risks involved in SVB's public communication of its remediation strategy. But while the risk of uninsured depositors acting collectively was a significant vulnerability, communications from management caused this group to begin to withdraw their deposits on a massive scale and in a coordinated fashion. We know that there were many supervisory issues at SVB over several years. At the time the bank failed, it had been selling securities to improve liquidity and raising capital to address some of these fundamental weaknesses in its funding and liquidity. Simply the act of announcing that the bank's management was taking steps to remediate these issues created panic—highlighting the risks they were confronting—and the panic spread quickly. Social media has also played a role in fueling stock price volatility, which can lead to other risks to a bank. In October of last year, rumors circulated about Credit Suisse's stock price conflating stock price with capital and liquidity strength. Despite Credit Suisse management's efforts to intervene and calm markets, its stock experienced significant volatility, resulting in an increase in the spreads on the firm's credit default swaps and a decrease in the value of its bonds. Credit Suisse had been dealing with significant issues for an extended period of time, but this incident highlighted how quickly investor sentiment can change in the age of social media. Bank Culture and MindsetA more subtle way we are seeing banking evolve is most evident in the "culture" of banking for those banks whose business models directly involve funders of startups, transformative new technologies, or novel activities like digital and crypto assets. For many banks, innovation has been a long-term priority because it enables them to offer customers new products and services and remain competitive in the current financial services environment.6But regardless of the business model, the culture of a bank must also prioritize the values and rules that make banks successful over time. This includes not only being responsive to the needs of their customers and communities, but also maintaining a strong risk-management culture. The expansion from traditional bank business models brings an influx of non-bankers into bank management. Over the past several years, there have been a number of charter-strip acquisitions, where a new management group transforms a traditional bank's business model. And we have seen consistent growth in banking-as-a-service partnerships—where the bank partners with a nonbank company, often a fintech, to offer new products and services. Even without these external influences, bankers who leverage innovation as a significant aspect of their business model often have a mindset that is compatible with continued innovation and are less sensitive to regulatory and supervisory communications. I view these trends as part of a cultural shift within these banks. Some innovators espouse an "ask for forgiveness, not permission" mentality when it comes to regulation and compliance. This is a particularly dangerous mindset when it comes to banking. Bank supervisors often rely on their interactions with bankers to communicate supervisory concerns. This enables supervisors to provide feedback to bank management before these issues escalate and are cited in examination reports and as Matters Requiring Attention (MRAs), Matters Requiring Immediate Attention (MRIAs), or enforcement actions. But bank management must be receptive to these supervisory messages and should take proactive measures to address the issues identified. This kind of proactive approach may not be the most natural reaction for those who have been successful in a less-regulated tech or start-up environment. The Policy ResponseGiven the recent banking sector stress, it is clear that we need to review the bank regulatory and supervisory framework to determine whether updates are needed. As we consider potential changes to improve supervision and regulation, we should start from a baseline understanding of the available tools and determine whether those tools have been utilized and implemented effectively. Before regulators seek new tools, it is necessary to understand the need—how would the use of those new tools address deficiencies in the existing regulatory toolkit? Imposing additional requirements on regulated institutions without understanding this need results in additional costs and can have unintended consequences like encouraging bank consolidation and constraining credit availability to critical business activities or geographies. In addition to these unintended consequences, we also need to carefully consider the broader implications of regulatory change for financial stability. The policy response to a crisis should be multifaceted, as changes to different elements of supervision and regulation in combination may be the most efficient and effective response. We should have no illusions that "getting it right"—finding the right combination of regulatory and supervisory changes—is a simple task. This fine tuning is a core element of maintaining an effective system, constantly re-evaluating whether our tools are effective and used appropriately. There are a few specific areas where I see a need to revisit our approach, specifically in supervision, regulation, and technology. SupervisionStarting with supervision, effective bank supervision requires both transparency in expectations, and an assertive supervisory approach when firms fail to meet these expectations. In the past, I have spoken about the virtue of transparency in supervision.7Transparency in supervisory expectations builds legitimacy, promotes a compliance culture, and is critical to ensuring that we preserve due process. Transparency between a bank and its examiners can be a profoundly effective tool by allowing bankers to air issues early with their examiners. This type of communication promotes understanding—of the bank and its operation by examination staff, and of regulatory expectations by the bank's management and board of directors. Amorphous standards or standards that change without prior notice frustrate this goal. If regulators are clear in our expectations with banks, and banks fail to meet those expectations, regulators are well-positioned to take strong action and demand remediation of supervisory issues. When a bank fails to promptly address identified issues, the bank and the banking system run the risk that those issues can become far more damaging over time. There is a significant cost to delay. While the specific timelines for remediation of supervisory issues vary significantly across firms, the Board has published statistics on the number of and general nature of supervisory findings, and how those have evolved over time.8Remediation of technology infrastructure, data, and operational resilience issues often take longer to address than those in other business areas or related to risk management.9Some variability is reasonable as these issues vary in complexity. And, to the extent that a bank is reliant on third parties, core providers, or others to help remediate issues, providing sufficient remediation time can be necessary and appropriate. Providing time to remediate issues should not be a pretext for inaction or inattention to important supervisory issues. Ultimately, one of the primary goals of supervision is to hold the bank accountable for safety and soundness and consumer compliance. Accountability is critical for both the bank and for supervisors. Where regulators have failed in supervision, we must hold ourselves accountable. Part of the solution to inaction may simply be to take a stronger approach when examiners have identified deficiencies in need of remediation. But for some banks, management's responsiveness to supervision—traditionally an area that rewarded conservative and prudent management—has changed, with a greater emphasis on innovation, especially those that promise to transform the business of banking. These shifts impact supervision, in that we need to reevaluate the effectiveness of formal and informal enforcement mechanisms. If moral suasion as an informal tool is less effective, and bank management and boards are less attuned to hear and respond to supervisory messages, we need to reconsider our supervisory toolkit. This may mean taking more formal remediation measures, with definitive timelines, and imposing meaningful consequences for firms that fail to remediate issues in a timely way. In addition to being transparent, supervision must be nimble and responsive because the financial services landscape and bank risks evolve over time. The low interest rate environment following the 2008 financial crisis shifted the supervisory focus away from interest rate risk to other risks, just as the current rising rate environment required supervisors to return to interest rate and emerging credit risk.10 Supervision must also complement regulation. While regulation is a critical tool, it operates with a significant lag for most developed banking systems. This is where supervision can complement regulation to address emerging threats and risks by allowing supervisors to pivot to those fundamental risks that may be most salient based on that bank's business model and evolving economic conditions. RegulationIn response to the recent bank failures, it is tempting to engage in a wholesale revision of the bank regulatory framework. Before changing rules, we need to take a critical look at actual weaknesses, and acknowledge the strengths that should be preserved. As a threshold matter, today's regulatory system is fundamentally strong. But as the Federal Reserve continues to carefully monitor developments and changes to the banking system, we must recognize that the regulatory framework has been transformed through a broad range of changes in response to the 2008 financial crisis. These changes have led to a strong and resilient banking system. Overall, our regulatory framework is also strong. This framework has materially increased bank capital and liquidity and added a number of other requirements to improve resiliency, including new stress testing and resolution planning requirements. Following the 2008 crisis, the U.S. regulators implemented changes designed to improve the quality and quantity of bank capital. This included the introduction of common equity tier 1 (CET1) as a measure of the highest quality form of regulatory capital, and the capital conservation buffer. Today, large U.S. banks are also subject to additional capital requirements, based on the tiering framework. For all banks with over $100 billion in assets, the requirements include the stress capital buffer and a number of additional GSIB and large firm-specific requirements. The U.S. capital requirements are described as "gold plating" the standards set in the Basel III reforms. This is today's starting point, and it is strong. With the commitment of U.S. regulators to implement Basel III capital reforms, there will soon be additional changes to the capital framework.11I would like to better understand the U.S. approach to these reforms before passing judgement, but if changes are implemented in a way that takes costs and benefits into consideration and preserves capital neutrality, in my view, these reforms could improve the capital framework. Prior to 2008, there were also no standardized, quantitative liquidity requirements for U.S. banks and their holding companies. Today, there are two: the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, which supports short-term resilience by requiring banks to have liquidity to cover net cash outflows in a 30-day stress period; and the Net Stable Funding Ratio, which requires firms to maintain stable funding over a one-year time horizon. There are also internal liquidity stress testing and liquidity buffer requirements. With this in mind, we should be careful and intentional about any significant changes to the regulatory framework, including imposing new requirements that will materially increase funding costs, like higher capital requirements or the requirement of firms to issue long-term debt. Many of the issues related to the recent bank failures have been identified in bank management and supervision. Therefore, a broad-based imposition of new capital requirements on all banks with more than $50 billion in assets would be a far more costly solution than taking the time to specifically identify and address known management and supervisory process issues. Relying on the timeless adage to guide us: if it ain't broke, don't fix it. I do not mean to suggest that regulation has worked perfectly and needs no improvement or maintenance. I think where we find improvements are necessary, we should make them. But we should also be working toward a defined goal and verifiable end state that incorporates the principle of efficiency. And of course, regulation should be durable throughout the economic cycle. Our regulatory framework is extremely complex with many overlapping and sometimes contradictory requirements. Engaging in a piece by piece, regulation by regulation approach will likely have a similar outcome. TechnologyWe should also review and update the Fed services available to support banking system resiliency. In payments, the Federal Reserve offers payments-related services including Fedwire®to facilitate wire transfers. In the U.S., the Federal Reserve serves as the "lender of last resort" to the banking system, providing loans at the discount window since the early part of the twentieth century. These tools are important but are not effective mechanisms to rescue troubled institutions. Discount window lending is available only to institutions that meet certain minimum eligibility standards, and that have collateral available to pledge. Its function is to provide a solvent institution with a vital backup source of liquidity to meet unexpected customer outflows. Similarly, the ability to process fast, efficient payments can also facilitate effective market functioning, but its utility is limited. In light of the extensive recent use of these tools and the lessons that can be learned, I think it is time to review these tools—which operate during limited, fixed hours and rely to some extent on dated technology—to determine whether they have kept up with the pace of change for the future payments landscape and expectations of liquidity planning. These tools must be nimble and flexible to support the banking system during times of stress. I think it is important that we understand how well these tools functioned in early March as two U.S. banks experienced stress and ultimately failed, and what can be improved regarding timeliness or effectiveness of fulfilling the lender of last resort function. The Path ForwardMy views on the path forward are informed by serving as the bank commissioner for the state of Kansas as its lead regulator and supervisor, my experience as a banker, and especially by my service on the Board of Governors since 2018, during a time when the banking system has experienced many unique stresses including those associated with the COVID pandemic. There have already been some preliminary and expedited internal reports published on the failures of SVB and Signature Bank, and I fully expect to see additional reports and analysis of these failures, and the failure of First Republic, in the coming months.12These preliminary reviews are an important first step for the U.S. bank regulators working to identify root causes of these bank failures and holding themselves accountable for supervisory mistakes. There are additional steps that we can take. First, I believe that the Federal Reserve should engage an independent third party to prepare a report to supplement the limited internal review to fully understand the failure of SVB. This would be a logical next step in holding ourselves accountable and would help to eliminate the doubts that may naturally accompany any self-assessment prepared and reviewed by a single member of the Board of Governors.13This external independent report should also cover a broader time period, including the events of the weekend following the failure of SVB, and a broader range of topics beyond just the regulatory and supervisory framework that applied to SVB, including operational issues, if any, with discount window lending, Fedwire services, and with the transfer of collateral from the Federal Home Loan Banks. Second, I believe we need to do a better job identifying the most salient issues and moving quickly to remediate them. It is clearly evident that both supervisors and bank management neglected key, long-standing risk factors that should be an area of focus in any examination. These include concentration risk, liquidity risk, and interest rate risk. We have the tools to address these issues, but we need to ensure that examiners focus on these core risks and are not distracted by novel activity or concepts. Finally, we should consider whether there are necessary—and targeted—adjustments we should make to banking regulation. This will likely include a broad range of topics, including taking a close look at deposit insurance reform, the treatment of uninsured deposits, and a reconsideration of current deposit insurance limits.14We should avoid using these bank failures as a pretext to push for other, unrelated changes to banking regulation. Our focus should be on remediating known, identified issues with bank supervision and issues that emerge from the public autopsy of these events. A debate about regulatory changes must also consider where we are today as compared to prior to the 2008 financial crisis. The banking system is strong and resilient despite recent banking stress. The Fed has refined regulatory standards over time at the direction of Congress, most recently pursuant to the bipartisan Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act,15and through so-called "tailoring" regulations designed to better align regulation with risk. Even with the implementation of these changes, banks today are better capitalized, with more liquidity, and are subject to a new range of supervisory tools that did not exist prior to 2008. This paints a picture of a banking system that is not only strong today but is well prepared to continue supporting the provision of credit and the broader economy. Calls for radical reform of the bank regulatory framework—as opposed to targeted changes to address identified root causes of banking system stress—are incompatible with the fundamental strength of the banking system. I am extremely concerned about calls for casting aside tiering expectations for less complex institutions, given the clear statutory direction to provide for appropriately calibrated requirements for these banks. I have heard the drumbeat calling for broad, fundamental reforms for the past several years, shifting away from tailoring and risk-based supervision. I believe this is the wrong direction for any conversation about banking reform. The unique nature and business models of the banks that recently failed, in my view, do not justify imposing new, overly complex regulatory and supervisory expectations on a broad range of banks. If we allow this to occur, we will end up with a system of significantly fewer banks serving significantly fewer customers. Those who will likely bear the burden of this new banking system are those at the lower end of the economic spectrum, both individuals and businesses. The American economy relies on a broad and diverse range of businesses supported by a broad and diverse range of banks. The elimination of regional banks from the US banking system would be devastating to businesses and communities across America. Especially for those regions whose communities are not sufficiently served by larger institutions. I appreciate your time and engagement, and I look forward to discussing how the participants view these issues, and what it might mean for the future of banking in your financial systems. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. See Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos.htm.Return to text 3. See Jonathan D. Rose,"Old-Fashioned Deposit Runs," (PDF)Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-111, table 1 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 2015).Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Financial Stability Report," (PDF)box 3.1. (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2023).Return to text 5. See Rose, "Old-Fashioned Deposit Runs."Return to text 6. See Michelle W. Bowman,"The Innovation Imperative: Modernizing Traditional Banking" (PDF)Speech at the Independent Community Bankers of America ICBA Live 2023 Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii (March 14, 2023).Return to text 7. See Michelle W. Bowman,"Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision," (PDF)Speech to the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, Orlando, Florida (February 13, 2023).Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Supervision and Regulation Report" (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2022).Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report.Return to text 10. Starting in the summer of 2022, the Federal Reserve took important steps to implement this shift in priorities for the regional banking organization portfolio (which includes banking institutions with between $10 billion to $100 billion in assets), and community banking organization portfolio (which includes banking institutions with less than $10 billion in assets). These efforts culminated in internal outreach to examiners and external outreach to banks in both the RBO and CBO portfolios to promote awareness and proactive management of these risks in the fall of 2022. See, e.g., Ask the Fed, a Program of the Federal Reserve System, "A Discussion of Unrealized Losses at Community Banks in a Rising Interest Rate Environment" (December 16, 2022); Community Bank Connections, "2022 Year-End Message from Governor Bowman" ("… banks with unrealized securities losses need to carefully consider the potential impact of holding securities with below-market interest rates, including, among other things, the impact on their liquidity, capital, and earnings."); and Ask the Fed, a Program of the Federal Reserve System, "Risk Considerations in a Rising Rate Environment: Applying a Sound Supervisory Approach (April 11, 2023).Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Agencies Reaffirm Commitment to Basel III Standards"joint press release (September 9, 2022).Return to text 12. See Government Accountability Office,"Bank Regulation: Preliminary Review of Agency Actions Related to March 2023 Bank Failures" (PDF)GAO-23-106736 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, April 2023); Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,"FDIC's Supervision of Signature Bank" (PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, April 28, 2023); Michael Barr, Vice Chair for Supervision of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank" (PDF)(April 28, 2023).Return to text 13. As noted in Vice Chair for Supervision Michael Barr's review of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, "[the] report was written with the benefit of hindsight on the particular facts and circumstances that proved most relevant for SVB and SVBFG. The report was prepared in a compressed time frame from March 13, 2023, through April 28, 2023, and further work over a longer period could draw additional or different conclusions." Barr,Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank.Return to text 14. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,"Options for Deposit Insurance Reform" (PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, May 1, 2023).Return to text 15. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Public Law No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the 2023 International Insurance Forum, National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), Washington, D.C. Good morning, everyone. Thank you for inviting me to speak. It is a pleasure to be here. I would like to use this opportunity to share with you my outlook on the U.S. economy, credit conditions, and monetary policy. Before I start, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. Aggregate Economic ActivityDespite heightened uncertainty, due to banking-sector stress, geopolitical instability, and the aftermath of the pandemic, I expect the economy to grow in the second quarter. The pace of growth, however, will be slower than what we observed in the first quarter, when real GDP increased at an annual rate of 1.1 percent. My expectation is based mainly on data that showed weakening spending in recent months, and other data that imply moderating spending, including a sizable decline in April in consumer sentiment, as measured by the initial estimate of the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. While my base case forecast for the U.S. economy is not a recession, I expect spending and GDP growth to remain quite slow over the rest of 2023, due to continued tight financial conditions, low consumer sentiment, and a decline in household savings that had built up after the onset of the pandemic. Furthermore, I acknowledge that there are downside risks, among them the possibility that the degree of bank lending restraint and uncertainty could weigh on economic activity more than I expect. The Labor MarketEven as GDP growth has slowed, employment has continued to increase, and the current labor market is one of the strongest that U.S. workers have experienced in decades. The economy created 253,000 jobs in April and the unemployment rate was 3.4 percent, the lowest since 1969. Job creation has been remarkably resilient to tighter financial conditions. Employers have added an average of 280,000 jobs a month this year. That's down from the 350,000 a month created in the second half of 2022 but still robust. The tight labor market has boosted wages and other compensation for workers. Wage growth has continued to run ahead of the pace consistent with 2 percent inflation and current trends in productivity growth. Wage gains are welcome as long as they are consistent with price stability. Over the 12 months ended in March 2023, the employment cost index (ECI) for total hourly compensation for private-sector workers rose 4.8 percent, down only a little from its peak of 5.5 percent last June. My expectation is that the slowing economy will soon begin to reduce job growth, with labor supply and labor demand coming into better balance. The unemployment rate may rise gradually to levels still consistent with a growing economy. Data on job openings and voluntary quits by workers indicate that labor demand has eased somewhat, and this is reflected also in a modest decline in the growth of average hourly earnings, from a 12-month rate of 5 percent in November to 4.4 percent in April. InflationNow let me turn to the outlook for inflation. While inflation has come down substantially since last summer, it is still too high, and by some measures progress has been slowing. After peaking at a 12-month rate of 7 percent last June, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation fell to 4.2 percent in March, which is also down from 5.1 percent in February. That reflects substantial decreases in energy prices and a big slowdown in food inflation. Cheaper energy and a slowdown in food price increases are good news for lower- and middle-income households that spend a larger share of their income for these items. But outside of energy and food, the progress on inflation remains a challenge. Excluding these prices, which tend to be more volatile than prices of other goods and services, leaves what we call "core" inflation, and this measure is a useful guide to discern longer-lasting movements in inflation. Core PCE inflation was 4.6 percent in March, down from a peak of 5.4 percent in February 2022. While we do not have a report on PCE inflation for April yet, another inflation measure, the core component of the consumer price index (CPI), showed little further improvement in April. Looking more closely at core inflation, I like to divide it into three parts—core goods inflation; housing, which is classified as a service; and nonhousing services. Core goods inflation fell sharply over the second half of 2022 as supply-chain bottlenecks eased, but more recently it has stabilized at around 2.6 percent. Housing services inflation, which includes rent and the equivalent for owner-occupied homes, is 8.2 percent on a 12-month basis. Housing is a big part of inflation, and while rent increases on new leases have come down considerably over the past year, it will take some time for this softening in rents to show through to the 12-month changes. And, finally, inflation in nonhousing services, the largest component of services, has been stubbornly high at around 4.5 percent and shows no signs of significant decline yet. Recent Stress in the Banking SectorOverall, the U.S. banking system is sound and resilient, and I am confident it will be able to continue to play its important role providing credit to households and businesses. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to expect that recent stress events will lead some banks to tighten credit standards further. The evidence is that so far there has been only a modest incremental tightening of lending conditions, which had already tightened considerably over the past year since the Federal Reserve began raising interest rates. In a survey conducted by the Federal Reserve in April, loan officers reported that 46 percent of banks had tightened credit terms in the previous three months for commercial and industrial lending to larger firms, versus 44.8 percent that had tightened in the January survey. The April survey's increase in the share of banks reporting tightening was similar, though a bit larger, for commercial and industrial lending to smaller firms. At this point, it is hard to tell how much of this tightening was in train already, after continued increases in interest rates, and it is likewise difficult to say how much the stress in midsized banks will ultimately curtail credit in the coming year. Furthermore, there is considerable uncertainty about the magnitude of the impact on household spending and business investment, and this uncertainty complicates economic outlook forecasts. The Insurance Industry ResiliencyGiven your gathering here today, I would be remiss if I did not say a word or two about the insurance industry before closing. The insurance industry has performed well through recent stresses. Although the profitability of property and casualty insurance companies in 2022 was reduced by natural catastrophes and inflation, the industry's capital appears strong when considering a range of plausible stress events. For life insurers, the recent increase in interest rates has been a mostly welcome development that has supported higher investment returns but also poses risks, such as early withdrawals by some policyholders. While the life insurance industry's capitalization remains strong, the use of reinsurance merits continued monitoring. With that said, let me turn to monetary policy. Considerations for Monetary PolicySo what factors will I consider in the coming weeks as I contemplate the appropriate stance of monetary policy going forward? Over the next few weeks, we will receive a considerable amount of data on economic activity for April and May, including the employment report for May and a report on May CPI inflation. Monetary policy should be forward-looking. It should be conducted so that longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored around our inflation target of 2 percent. Monetary policy should also be data dependent to allow for continuous learning about the underlying structure of the economy as new data arrive. These principles of monetary policymaking are always valuable, especially so when the level of uncertainty is high, as it is now. I am guided by the dual mandate assigned to the Federal Reserve by the U.S. Congress: price stability and maximum employment. On the one hand, inflation is too high, and we have not yet made sufficient progress on reducing it. On the other hand, GDP has slowed considerably this year, and even though the effect has been muted in the labor market so far, demand clearly has begun to feel the effects of interest rates that are 5 percentage points higher than they were a little over a year ago. History shows that monetary policy works with long and variable lags, and that a year is not a long enough period for demand to feel the full effect of higher interest rates. Another factor weighing on my thinking is the uncertainty about tighter lending standards that I mentioned earlier. I intend to consider all these factors in the coming weeks as I contemplate the appropriate stance of monetary policy going forward. Thank you.