Governor Christopher J. Waller At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York Thank you, Ben, and thank you to the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) for inviting me to be part of this discussion. It has been close to a year since the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began tightening monetary policy. We began raising interest rates in March 2022 and shrinking our securities holdings in June in order to bring inflation down to our 2 percent target.1Today I thought I would spend a few minutes taking stock of the year behind us and talking about what's next. A year ago, inflation was elevated and rapidly accelerating, and the Fed moved to quickly and dramatically tighten monetary policy. At the end of December, the federal funds rate target was set in a range of 4.25 percent to 4.5 percent, the highest in 15 years. Economic activity, meanwhile, has been holding up well. After shrinking slightly in the first half of 2022, real gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of 3.2 percent in the third quarter, and monthly data suggest it grew around 2 percent in the fourth quarter. I expect such slowing to continue in this quarter, which is both expected and desirable in our ongoing fight to lower inflation. The FOMC's goal in raising interest rates is to dampen demand and economic activity to support further reductions in inflation. And there is ample evidence that this is exactly what is going on in the business sector. On the manufacturing side, industrial production declined for the second month in December. And the Institute for Supply Management's (ISM) forward-looking indicators of orders and customers' inventory suggested that further weakening is in train. Meanwhile, the ISM survey for nonmanufacturing businesses, which had reported expansion since April of last year, indicated a slight contraction in December. This slowdown in services activity was widespread, affecting 11 of 17 sectors in the survey, with significant slowdowns in construction and real estate, two industries heavily affected by higher interest rates. This slowing in business activity is consistent with the FOMC's goal of damping demand and reducing production so that it is in better alignment with the productive capacity of the economy. The goal is not, I would emphasize, to halt economic activity, and so we will be watching these sectors closely to see how this moderation continues. Growth in consumer spending has also begun to slow. While that growth was surprisingly strong through most of the second half of 2022, nominal personal consumption expenditures growth slowed to 0.1 percent in November, and retail sales fell 1 percent. We don't have spending data on goods and services for December, but retail sales fell another 1.1 percent. While the latest readings of consumer sentiment from the University of Michigan moved up some from historic lows, I continue to expect that last year's decline in real incomes, along with higher borrowing costs, will moderate consumer spending this year and help return inflation more promptly to the FOMC's 2 percent target. Job one is maintaining the progress we are making in lowering inflation, and moderation in consumer spending will support that progress. The slowing in output growth has occurred alongside the continuing strength of the labor market. Total nonfarm employment grew 223,000 in December, close to the average of 237,000 a month for the fourth quarter. That is down quite a bit from the monthly increase of 539,000 in the first quarter of 2022 but still a solid growth rate, far above the number of new jobs needed to keep pace with population growth. Employment grew robustly in the leisure and health-care sectors, where labor shortages are reportedly severe. While the labor market is strong, it is also tight. The unemployment rate was 3.5 percent in December, matching the low reached before the pandemic, and the lowest in 53 years. But there are signs that demand for labor is moderating. Job openings reported in the November Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and job postings from December's Indeed data are down from their recent peaks. Temporary-help employment, which has sometimes been a leading indicator for overall employment, has declined in recent months, but that decrease may be due at least in part to employers opting to hire full-time workers in place of temps to help keep jobs filled. A robust labor market, despite modest economic growth, is a plus for workers and allows the Fed to focus on lowering inflation. It shows that jobs and income can hold up to the effects of higher interest rates, helping the FOMC continue its efforts to lower inflation to our 2 percent goal by further tightening monetary policy. A potential downside of a tight labor market is if labor costs, which heavily influence inflation, grow so fast that they slow progress toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Wages and other measures of compensation accelerated as inflation surged in the second half of 2021 and wage growth remained high in 2022. But as overall inflation has begun to moderate in recent months, so have some measures of growth in wages and other compensation. For example, the 12-month increase in average hourly earnings hit a recent peak of 5.6 percent in March (which is when the Fed began raising interest rates) and has been falling gradually and fairly steadily since then, reaching an annual rate of 4.6 percent in December. The 3-month annualized change in average hourly earnings—4.1 percent in December—is running below the 12-month rate and is thus a signal of ongoing moderation. These are encouraging signs, but we need to see continued improvement across various measures of labor costs, because additional moderation is needed to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal and because a significant escalation in wage growth could drive up longer-range inflation expectations. Those longer-range expectations have been fairly stable through this period of very high inflation, and we want it to stay that way because escalating expectations could drive inflation higher. Let me turn now to the outlook for inflation. Last week's report on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) showed that inflation continued to moderate in December, which was very welcome news. First, I am going to spell out why this was such good news, and then I am going to turn around and explain why I am still cautious about the inflation outlook and supportive of continued monetary policy tightening. Overall headline inflation fell a tenth of a percent month over month in December, the first monthly drop since May 2020. The 12-month change in inflation peaked at 9 percent in June, and has fallen every month since, to 6.5 percent in December. A big factor in the monthly decline in headline inflation in December was a significant drop in energy prices, which more than offset an increase in food prices. The FOMC targets headline inflation because food and energy are considerable expenses for most people, but they are more volatile than other components of the index, and by factoring them out, "core" inflation can provide a picture of where inflation is headed. Here also, we are seeing some progress. Yearly core inflation was down in December to 5.7 percent, from 6 percent in November and a peak of 6.6 percent in September. Over the past three months, core CPI inflation has run at an annualized rate of 3.1 percent, a noticeable drop from earlier in 2022. Another encouraging sign is that higher inflation was less concentrated—the share of categories of different goods and services with inflation over 3 percent has declined in the past several months, from almost three fourths in early 2022 to less than one half in December. That's good news because it indicates that broader inflationary pressure across the economy is easing. Now, here's why I am cautious about these latest results and why I am not ready yet to substantially alter my outlook for inflation. Month-over-month core CPI inflation actually ticked up in December from November and is pretty much where it was in October and where it was in March when we began raising interest rates. Although inflation measured over 12 months has been falling, December's reading is still close to where it was a year ago. Core inflation was 6 percent year over year (YOY) in January 2022 and was 5.7 percent YOY last month. Thus, it basically moved sideways all year. So, while it is possible to take a month or three months of data and paint a rosy picture, I caution against doing so. The shorter the trend, the larger the grain of salt when swallowing a story about the future. Back in 2021, we saw three consecutive months of relatively low readings of core inflation before it jumped back up. We do not want to be head-faked. I will be looking for the recent improvement in headline and core inflation to continue. Wages, as I indicated earlier, are another stream of data that I will be watching for evidence of continued progress to help ease overall inflation. Though recent hourly earnings data are a positive development, I need to see more evidence of wage moderation to sustainable levels. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Wage Growth Tracker has been running higher lately and has moderated less. The employment cost index for December won't be out until the end of this month. Over time, we need to see wages grow more in line with productivity growth plus 2 percentage points, consistent with the FOMC's inflation target. Those are reasons that I am cautious about the recent good news, but it is good news. We have made progress. Six months ago, when inflation was escalating and economic output had flattened, I argued that a soft landing was still possible—that it was quite plausible to make progress on inflation without seriously damaging the labor market. So far, we have managed to do so, and I remain optimistic that this progress can continue. I believe that monetary policy should continue to tighten, but using a comparison I employed in a speech a couple months ago, the view from the cockpit is very different at 30,000 feet than it is close to the ground. When the FOMC began raising the federal funds rate last spring from near zero, it made sense to move quickly. But after front-loading monetary policy tightening, with many unprecedented 75 basis point hikes in the federal funds rate target, by early December I believed the policy stance was slightly restrictive, and I supported a decision by the Committee to hike by a still considerable 50 basis points.2To return to the airplane image, after climbing steeply and using monetary policy to significantly raise interest rates throughout the economy, it was apparent to me that it was time to slow, but not halt, the rate of ascent. And in keeping with this logic and based on the data in hand at this moment, there appears to be little turbulence ahead, so I currently favor a 25-basis point increase at the FOMC's next meeting at the end of this month. Beyond that, we still have a considerable way to go toward our 2 percent inflation goal, and I expect to support continued tightening of monetary policy. I think that is probably enough from me, so that there will be more time for you to ask questions. Thank you again to the CFR for the opportunity to be here today. 1. The FOMC communicated its intentions for some time before March, and this guidance effectively began monetary policy tightening before raising rates and beginning the tapering of asset purchases that month. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the FOMC.Return to text 2. Each 75 basis point hike was the largest rate single increase since the FOMC began announcing its rate decisions in 1994. The Committee raised rates at individual meetings by larger amounts in the early 1980s, when it raised the federal funds rate to near 20 percent.Return to text
Federal bank regulatory agencies today issued a statement highlighting key risks for banking organizations associated with crypto-assets and the crypto-asset sector and describing the agencies' approaches to supervision in this area. In particular, the statement describes several key risks associated with crypto-assets and the crypto-asset sector, as demonstrated by the significant volatility and vulnerabilities over the past year. Given these risks, the agencies continue to take a careful and cautious approach related to current and proposed crypto-asset-related activities and exposures at banking organizations. The agencies continue to assess whether or how current and proposed crypto-asset-related activities by banking organizations can be conducted in a manner that is safe and sound, legally permissible, and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including those designed to protect consumers. The agencies will continue to closely monitor crypto-asset-related exposures of banking organizations, and, as warranted, will issue additional statements related to engagement by banking organizations in crypto-asset related activities.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, Florida Governor Bowman presented identical remarks to the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Tampa, Florida, on January 11, 2023. Thank you, Bill, and I'd also like to thank Alex Sanchez and the Florida Bankers Association for the invitation to be with you today. It is a pleasure to be here in person to discuss issues that are top of mind for all of us as we begin the new year. I will start with some thoughts about the Federal Reserve's ongoing effort to lower inflation, which continues to be much too high. I will then touch on other issues in the Fed's purview, including bank supervision and regulation.1 While the Fed has access to a staff of expert economists and a seemingly infinite flow of economic data to inform our decision-making, I often find that the most valuable data comes directly from the experiences and perspectives of those who are engaged in and supporting the economy through the financial system. In my more than four years as a member of the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I have learned that there are few who understand the economy more directly than bankers, business owners and the customers you serve. Monetary PolicyLet me begin by discussing the Fed's efforts to lower inflation. Inflation is much too high, and I am focused on bringing it down toward our 2 percent goal. Inflation affects everyone, but it is especially harmful to lower- and middle-income Americans, who spend a greater share of their income on necessities like food and housing. Stable prices are the bedrock of a healthy economy and are necessary to support a labor market that works for all Americans. Over the past year, I have supported the FOMC's policy actions to address high inflation, and I am committed to taking further actions to bring inflation back down to our goal. Since last March, the FOMC has been tightening monetary policy through a combination of increasing the federal funds rate by 4-1/4 percentage points and reducing our balance sheet holdings. In recent months, we've seen a decline in some measures of inflation but we have a lot more work to do, so I expect the FOMC will continue raising interest rates to tighten monetary policy, as we stated after our December meeting.2My views on the appropriate size of future rate increases and on the ultimate level of the federal funds rate will continue to be guided by the incoming data and its implications for the outlook for inflation and economic activity. I will be looking for compelling signs that inflation has peaked and for more consistent indications that inflation is on a downward path, in determining both the appropriate size of future rate increases and the level at which the federal funds rate is sufficiently restrictive. I expect that once we achieve a sufficiently restrictive federal funds rate, it will need to remain at that level for some time in order to restore price stability, which will in turn help to create conditions that support a sustainably strong labor market. Maintaining a steadfast commitment to restoring price stability is essential to support a sustainably strong labor market. To this point, unemployment has remained low as we have tightened monetary policy and made progress in lowering inflation. I take this as a hopeful sign that we can succeed in lowering inflation without a significant economic downturn. It is likely that as a part of this process, labor markets will soften somewhat before we bring inflation back to our 2 percent goal. While the effects of monetary policy tightening on the job market have generally been limited so far, slowing the economy will likely mean that job creation also slows. And if there are unforeseen shocks to the economy, growth may slow further. It's important to keep in mind that there are costs and risks to tightening policy to lower inflation, but I see the costs and risks of allowing inflation to persist as far greater. These dynamics make the difficult decisions facing the FOMC even more challenging, but it is absolutely necessary that the Committee achieves our goal of price stability. From the late 1960s through the mid-1980s, the U.S. economy experienced high inflation, high unemployment, and declining living standards. During that time, policymakers prematurely eased monetary policy when the economy weakened, and inflation remained high. The FOMC was forced to return to tightening monetary policy, causing a deep recession in 1981 and 1982. This is an important lesson that guides my thinking about monetary policy and my continued support for policy actions that will continue to lower inflation. It is also important to remember that today's inflation is a global concern. This is because some of the factors driving inflation in the United States are global, including the disruption to goods production and trade during the pandemic, the shutdown and reopening of large economies, and the more recent disruption of food and energy supplies due to conflicts abroad. Monetary policy can do very little to improve supply disruptions, but it can help bring supply and demand into better alignment. While the path ahead looks uncertain, I am encouraged by three specific developments. The first is the ongoing strength of the labor market, which was further supported with last Friday's jobs report. So far, the job market has remained resilient despite higher interest rates and slower growth. The second development is that the balance sheets of households have remained strong, with low debt levels. Low debt and strong balance sheets together with the strong labor market mean that consumers and businesses can continue to spend even as economic growth slows. The third point is the strength of the U.S. banking system, with high levels of capital and liquidity, due in large part to the reforms adopted after the last financial crisis. I will turn now to the banking and payments issues on the Fed's agenda, which include crypto and digital assets, innovation in payments, climate change and banking supervision, and likely changes to the rules implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). CryptocurrencyThe dysfunction in cryptocurrency markets has been well-documented, with some crypto firms misrepresenting that they have deposit insurance, the collapse of certain stablecoins, and, most recently, the bankruptcy of the FTX cryptocurrency exchange. These events have made it clear that cryptocurrency activities can pose significant risks to consumers, businesses, and potentially the larger financial system. While the traditional financial system has limited exposure to cryptocurrencies, I expect that some banks will continue to explore how to engage in crypto-related activities. The Fed and other banking agencies will continue to focus in this area, in light of the significant risks these activities may pose. But the bottom line is that we do not want to hinder innovation. As regulators, we should support innovation and recognize that the banking industry must evolve to meet consumer demand. By inhibiting innovation, we could be pushing growth in this space into the non-bank sector, leading to much less transparency and potential financial stability risk. We are thinking through some of these issues and what a regulatory approach could look like. PaymentsThe Fed plays an important role in fostering the safety and efficiency of the U.S. payments, clearing, and settlement systems. There have been a number of interesting developments on payments that continue to be top of mind for policymakers. One of these is the push for real-time payments. Since 2019, the Fed has been working to launch FedNow, a new faster payments system that will be available in the first half of 2023. FedNow will help transform the way payments are made through new direct services that enable consumers and businesses to make payments conveniently, in real time, on any day, and with immediate availability of funds for receivers. FedNow will enable depository institutions of every size, and in every community across America, to provide safe and efficient instant payment services. We have also been studying the concept of a central bank digital currency (CBDC). Several foreign governments and central banks are exploring digital currency, and there are many competing proposals suggesting a need to create a digital currency. The common theme underlying the need in these proposals is the desire to increase the speed and reduce the cost of financial transactions. Last January, the Fed published a paper soliciting comment on possible forms and uses of a CBDC in the United States. The Fed continues to study the idea, although much of what supporters hope to achieve with a central bank digital currency may be provided through FedNow and existing private payment services. In any case, initiatives to make payments faster and more efficient will continue to be an area of focus. Climate SupervisionClimate has also been a recent focus for Fed supervision, but our narrow interest in this area it is limited to the largest banks. Last fall, the Fed announced an exploratory pilot study with six of the GSIBs that is narrowly focused on the goal of enhancing the ability of supervisors and firms to measure and manage climate-related financial risks, not credit allocation. The Fed has also published a climate guidance proposal for banks over $100 billion in assets. These climate efforts do not apply to smaller and community banks. Smaller and community banks already integrate and comply with robust risk management expectations. The Fed views its role on climate as a narrow focus on supervisory responsibilities and limited to our role in promoting a safe, sound and stable financial system. While this climate supervision effort is a new area of focus, it has been a longstanding supervisory requirement that banks manage their risks related to extreme weather events and other natural disasters that could disrupt operations or impact business lines. Community Reinvestment ActThe last item on our regulatory agenda that I will note in my remarks today is the proposal to update the Community Reinvestment Act. The CRA requires the Fed and other banking agencies to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of their communities, including low- and moderate-income communities. This rule was last updated 25 years ago, and the banking industry has changed dramatically since the 1990s. The proposal reflects these industry changes, including recognizing internet and mobile banking services, it also attempts to provide clarity and consistency, and it could enhance access to credit for these low- and moderate-income communities. I am fully supportive of these efforts, but I also share the concern noted in public comments that have suggested that some of the elements included in this overhaul of the CRA framework result in significant new regulatory burden, particularly for the smallest and community banks. As we continue this important rulemaking process, it will be critical for the Fed to carefully weigh the costs and benefits of any changes before finalizing a proposal. I will stop there so we can move on to our conversation. Thank you again, for the opportunity to be with you today. I look forward to the discussion. 1. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 14.Return to text
Today, Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell tested positive for COVID-19 and is experiencing mild symptoms. Chair Powell is up to date with COVID-19 vaccines and boosters. Following Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance, he is working remotely while isolating at home. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Bank of Montreal, of Montreal, Canada, and BMO Financial Corp., of Wilmington, Delaware, to acquire BancWest Holding Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire Bank of the West, both of San Francisco, California. In connection with the Board's approval, Bank of Montreal has committed to provide the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation with an interim update to its resolution plan reflecting the combined organization. Additionally, because BMO Financial Corp. would become subject to heightened prudential standards following the transaction, Bank of Montreal will provide implementation plans for how it will comply with those standards when applicable. BMO Financial Corp. normally is on a two-year stress test cycle and received a new capital requirement last year. However, because the firm's capital requirement will not include the effects of today's acquisition until 2024, the Board will recalculate the bank's capital requirement based on the 2023 stress test to provide the firm with an updated requirement in the interim. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Statement by Vice Chair Brainard
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its denial of the application by Custodia Bank, Inc., Cheyenne, Wyoming, to become a member of the Federal Reserve System. The Board has concluded that the firm's application as submitted is inconsistent with the required factors under the law. Custodia is a special purpose depository institution, chartered by the state of Wyoming, which does not have federal deposit insurance. The firm proposed to engage in novel and untested crypto activities that include issuing a crypto asset on open, public and/or decentralized networks. The firm's novel business model and proposed focus on crypto-assets presented significant safety and soundness risks. The Board haspreviouslymade clear that such crypto activities are highly likely to be inconsistent with safe and sound banking practices. The Board also found that Custodia's risk management framework was insufficient to address concerns regarding the heightened risks associated with its proposed crypto activities, including its ability to mitigate money laundering and terrorism financing risks. In light of these and other concerns, the firm's application as submitted was inconsistent with the factors the Board is required to evaluate by law. The Board's order will be released following a review for confidential information. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it has fined Popular Bank, of New York, New York, $2.3 million for processing six Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans despite having detected that the loan applications contained significant indications of potential fraud and for failing to report the potential fraud in a timely manner. The six loans totaled approximately $1.1 million. Under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, Small Business Administration-approved lenders like Popular Bank were allowed to provide PPP loans to qualified small businesses negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, but were required to follow their anti-money laundering policies. Popular Bank's processing of potentially fraudulent PPP loans and failure to report the potential fraud in a timely manner violated these policies and constituted unsafe or unsound banking practices. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced preliminary financial information indicating that the Federal Reserve Banks had estimated net income of $58.4 billion in 2022. The 2022 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in coming months and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. The Federal Reserve Act requires the Reserve Banks to remit excess earnings to the U.S. Treasury after providing for operating costs, payments of dividends, and any amount necessary to maintain surplus. During a period when earnings are not sufficient to provide for those costs, a deferred asset is recorded. The deferred asset is the amount of net earnings the Reserve Banks will need to realize before their remittances to the U.S. Treasury resume. During 2022, Reserve Banks transferred $76.0 billion from weekly earnings to the U.S. Treasury, and, in September 2022, most Reserve Banks suspended weekly remittances to the Treasury and started accumulating a deferred asset, which totaled $18.8 billion by the end of the year. A deferred asset has no implications for the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy or its ability to meet its financial obligations. Additional information related to 2022 preliminary financial results for the Reserve Banks include: The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2013 through 2022 (estimated). For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the designation of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2023. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as Chair and a second as Deputy Chair. The Board continues to focus on increasing the diversity of Reserve Bank boards of directors so their composition better reflects the communities they serve. Updated information about thegender and race/ethnicity of Reserve Bank boards of directorsand about thesectors represented by those directorsis available on the Board's website. Similar details about Reserve Bank Branch boards of directors will be published in the coming weeks. Following are the names of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs designated by the Board for 2023: BostonCorey Thomas, chairman and chief executive officer, Rapid7, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, named Chair. Roger W. Crandall, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, Springfield, Massachusetts, named Deputy Chair. New YorkVincent Alvarez, president, New York City Central Labor Council, AFL-CIO, New York, New York, named Chair. Rosa M. Gil, founder, president, and chief executive officer, Comunilife, Inc., New York, New York, named Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaAnthony Ibarguen, chief executive officer, Quench USA, Inc., King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, named Chair. Sharmain Matlock-Turner, president and chief executive officer, Urban Affairs Coalition, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, named Deputy Chair. ClevelandDoris Carson Williams, president and chief executive officer, African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, named Chair. Heidi L. Gartland, chief government and community relations officer, University Hospitals, Cleveland, Ohio, named Deputy Chair. RichmondJodie W. McLean, chief executive officer, EDENS, Washington, D.C., named Chair. Lisa M. Hamilton, president and chief executive officer, The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Baltimore, Maryland, named Deputy Chair. AtlantaClaire Lewis Arnold, chief executive officer, Leapfrog Services, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, named Chair. Gregory A. Haile, president, Broward College, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, named Deputy Chair. ChicagoJennifer F. Scanlon, president and chief executive officer, UL Inc., Northbrook, Illinois, named Chair. Juan Salgado, chancellor, City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, named Deputy Chair. St. LouisJames M. McKelvey, Jr., founder and chief executive officer, Invisibly, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri, renamed Chair. Carolyn Chism Hardy, president and chief executive officer, Chism Hardy Investments, LLC, Bartlett, Tennessee, renamed Deputy Chair. MinneapolisSrilata Zaheer, dean, Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, renamed Chair. Chris Hilger, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Securian Financial, St. Paul, Minnesota, renamed Deputy Chair. Kansas CityPatrick A. Dujakovich, president, Greater Kansas City AFL-CIO, Kansas City, Missouri, named Chair. María Griego-Raby, president and principal, Contract Associates, Albuquerque, New Mexico, named Deputy Chair. DallasThomas J. Falk, retired chairman and chief executive officer, Kimberly-Clark Corporation, Dallas, Texas, renamed Chair. Claudia Aguirre, president and chief executive officer, BakerRipley, Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chair. San FranciscoTamara L. Lundgren, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc., Portland, Oregon, renamed Chair. David P. White, immediate past chief executive officer and chief negotiator, Screen Actors Guild (SAG-AFTRA), Los Angeles, California, and current venture partner, Ulu Ventures, Palo Alto, California, renamed Deputy Chair. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent prohibition order against Jamar WhitfieldFormer employee of Regional Acceptance Corporation,a nonbank subsidiary of Truist Financial Corporation, Charlotte, North CarolinaCoronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security, or CARES, Act loan fraud Consent prohibition order against Pollyanna RedmanFormer employee of Central Savings Bank, Sault Sainte Marie, MichiganMisappropriation of bank funds Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Note: On January 5, 2023, the Consent prohibition order against Jamar Whitfield PDF was updated.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued a policy statement to promote a level playing field for all banks with a federal supervisor, regardless of deposit insurance status. The statement makes clear that uninsured and insured banks supervised by the Board will be subject to the same limitations on activities, including novel banking activities, such as crypto-asset-related activities. The statement also makes clear that uninsured and insured banks supervised by the Board would be subject to the limitations on certain activities imposed on national banks, which are overseen by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The equal treatment will promote a level playing field and limit regulatory arbitrage. In addition, the statement reiterates that banks must both ensure that the activities they engage in are allowed under the law, and conduct their business in a safe and sound manner. For instance, a bank should have in place risk management processes, internal controls, and information systems that are appropriate and adequate for the nature, scope, and risks of its activities. In recent years, the Board has received a number of inquiries, notifications, and proposals from banks regarding potential engagement in novel and unprecedented activities, including those involving crypto-assets. In response, the Board's statement specifies how it will evaluate such inquiries, consistent with longstanding practice. Today's action would not prohibit a state member bank, or prospective applicant, from providing safekeeping services, in a custodial capacity, for crypto-assets if conducted in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with consumer, anti-money laundering, and anti-terrorist financing laws. The statement is effective upon publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board memo: Policy Statement on Section 9(13) of the Federal Reserve Act (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Policy Statement on Section 9(13) of the Federal Reserve Act
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday provided additional details on how its pilot climate scenario analysis exercise will be conducted and the information on risk management practices that will be gathered over the course of the exercise. As described in the instruction document released today, the six largest U.S. banks will analyze the impact of scenarios for both physical and transition risks related to climate change on specific assets in their portfolios. To support the exercise's goals of deepening understanding of climate risk-management practices and building capacity to identify, measure, monitor, and manage climate-related financial risks, the Board will gather qualitative and quantitative information over the course of the pilot, including details on governance and risk management practices, measurement methodologies, risk metrics, data challenges, and lessons learned. "The Fed has narrow, but important, responsibilities regarding climate-related financial risks – to ensure that banks understand and manage their material risks, including the financial risks from climate change," Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr said. "The exercise we are launching today will advance the ability of supervisors and banks to analyze and manage emerging climate-related financial risks." The pilot exercise includes physical risk scenarios with different levels of severity affecting residential and commercial real estate portfolios in the Northeastern United States and directs each bank to consider the impact of additional physical risk shocks for their real estate portfolios in another region of the country. For transition risks, banks will consider the impact on corporate loans and commercial real estate portfolios using a scenario based on current policies and one based on reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. These scenarios are not forecasts or policy prescriptions, but can be used to build understanding of climate-related financial risks. The Board anticipates publishing insights gained from the pilot at an aggregate level, reflecting what has been learned about climate risk management practices and how insights from scenario analysis will help identify potential risks and promote effective risk management practices. No firm-specific information will be released. Climate scenario analysis is distinct and separate from bank stress tests. The Board's stress tests are designed to assess whether large banks have enough capital to continue lending to households and businesses during a severe recession. The pilot climate scenario analysis exercise, on the other hand, is exploratory in nature and does not have capital consequences. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis (CSA) Exercise: Participant Instructions
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about deposit pricing and behavior, bank liability management, the provision of financial services, and reserve management strategies and practices. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between November 4, 2022, and November 18, 2022, and includes responses from banks that held slightly below three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from November 14 through December 14, 2022. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 13–14, 2022. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board's Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board's website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 13–14, 2022:HTML|PDF
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Symposium on Central Bank Independence, Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm, Sweden I will address three main points. First, the Federal Reserve's monetary policy independence is an important and broadly supported institutional arrangement that has served the American public well. Second, the Fed must continuously earn that independence by using our tools to achieve our assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability, and by providing transparency to facilitate understanding and effective oversight by the public and their elected representatives in Congress. Third, we should "stick to our knitting" and not wander off to pursue perceived social benefits that are not tightly linked to our statutory goals and authorities. Central bank independence and transparencyOn the first point, the case for monetary policy independence lies in the benefits of insulating monetary policy decisions from short-term political considerations.1Price stability is the bedrock of a healthy economy and provides the public with immeasurable benefits over time. But restoring price stability when inflation is high can require measures that are not popular in the short term as we raise interest rates to slow the economy. The absence of direct political control over our decisions allows us to take these necessary measures without considering short-term political factors. I believe that the benefits of independent monetary policy in the U.S. context are well understood and broadly accepted.2 In a well-functioning democracy, important public policy decisions should be made, in almost all cases, by the elected branches of government. Grants of independence to agencies should be exceedingly rare, explicit, tightly circumscribed, and limited to those issues that clearly warrant protection from short-term political considerations. With independence comes the responsibility to provide the transparency that enables effective oversight by Congress, which, in turn, supports the Fed's democratic legitimacy. At the Fed, we treat this as an active, not passive, responsibility, and over the past several decades we have steadily broadened our efforts to provide meaningful transparency about the basis for, and consequences of, the decisions we make in service to the American public. We are tightly focused on achieving our statutory mandate and on providing useful and appropriate transparency.3 Sticking to our mandateIt is essential that we stick to our statutory goals and authorities, and that we resist the temptation to broaden our scope to address other important social issues of the day.4Taking on new goals, however worthy, without a clear statutory mandate would undermine the case for our independence. In the area of bank regulation, too, the Fed has a degree of independence, as do the other federal bank regulators. Independence in this area helps ensure that the public can be confident that our supervisory decisions are not influenced by political considerations.5Today, some analysts ask whether incorporating into bank supervision the perceived risks associated with climate change is appropriate, wise, and consistent with our existing mandates. Addressing climate change seems likely to require policies that would have significant distributional and other effects on companies, industries, regions, and nations. Decisions about policies to directly address climate change should be made by the elected branches of government and thus reflect the public's will as expressed through elections. At the same time, in my view, the Fed does have narrow, but important, responsibilities regarding climate-related financial risks. These responsibilities are tightly linked to our responsibilities for bank supervision.6The public reasonably expects supervisors to require that banks understand, and appropriately manage, their material risks, including the financial risks of climate change. But without explicit congressional legislation, it would be inappropriate for us to use our monetary policy or supervisory tools to promote a greener economy or to achieve other climate-based goals.7We are not, and will not be, a "climate policymaker." ReferencesAlesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010). "Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and Accountability," speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, May 25. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022). "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposed Principles Providing a High-Level Framework for the Safe and Sound Management of Exposures to Climate-Related Financial Risks for Large Banking Organizations," press release, December 2. Crowe, Christopher, and Ellen E. Meade (2008). "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"European Journal of Political Economy,vol. 24 (December), pp. 763–77. Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be? (PDF)" inGoals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers,proceedings of a conference held in North Falmouth, Massachusetts, in June 1994. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195-221. Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 100 (November), pp. 1169-89. Tucker, Paul (2018).Unelected Power: The Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and the Regulatory State.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 1. In the past several decades, support for arrangements in which central banks made monetary policy decisions in pursuit of legislated goals of economic and price stability has been buttressed by theoretical and empirical research contributions, including by Kenneth Rogoff, on the benefits of central bank independence. See Rogoff (1985) as well as the discussion below of the distinction between goal independence and instrument independence. With regard to empirical evidence on the matter, see Alesina and Summers (1993) as well as the subsequent research literature of the past three decades, including Crowe and Meade (2008). Bernanke (2010) and Tucker (2018) provide overviews of the development of central bank independence.Return to text 2. Our situation is different from that of the European Central Bank, whose independence is enumerated in Article 130 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which is available from the European Union athttps://lexparency.org/eu/TFEU/ART_130.Return to text 3. We continue to strive to improve our transparency. Over my five years as Chair, I have pursued this aim by extending postmeeting press conferences to all FOMC meetings and instituting ongoing personal dialogue with legislators. This continuous dialogue goes well beyond the regular testimony, established by statute, in which I report to the congressional committees that have oversight responsibilities regarding monetary policy.Return to text 4. Although the Federal Reserve has been independent since its inception in 1914, its dual mandate only became part of the law in 1977 (see Bernanke, 2010). The existence of the dual mandate reflects the fact that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy independence corresponds to operational, or instrument, independence, rather than goal independence. See Debelle and Fischer (1994) for an analysis of the distinction between types of independence.Return to text 5. Like our monetary policy independence, our independence in this area comes with a high level of transparency about our policies and procedures.Return to text 6. For details, see Board of Governors (2022).Return to text 7. While U.S. monetary policy has the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, some other central banks have somewhat more expansive mandates. The Bank of England and the European Central Bank both have a primary mandate to maintain price stability but a secondary mandate to support the economic policies of the U.K. government and the European Union, respectively; see the Bank of England Act 1998, part II(11), available from the U.K. National Archives athttps://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/11/contents,and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Article 127(1), available from the European Union athttps://lexparency.org/eu/TFEU/ART_127.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the “110 Years of Deltas Embracing the Past while Shaping the Future” event, Norfolk, Virginia Happy Founders Day, Virginia Sorors! I recently came across a picture of myself in seventh grade at the county social science fair. It appeared in the Milledgeville, Ga.,Union-Recordernewspaper, which, mercifully, does not have an online photo archive. I did not know it at the time, but that social science fair picture is a milestone in my own journey, a path that has both intersected with and run parallel to those of Delta as a whole and to one Soror in particular—our first president, Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. I had learned about Sadie T.M. Alexander the year before, when my mother initiated the Nu Tau chapter of Delta on the campus of Georgia College and State University, where she was the first tenured African American faculty member. I heard conversations about all the Delta presidents, but Dr. Alexander struck a particular chord with me. I was fascinated by her life and work—partly for her intellect and determination, but also for the clarity she brought to my own understanding of research and its possibilities. My mother, Mary Murray Cook, and aunts, Dr. Loretta Murray Braxton and Wivona Murray Ward, were professors and teachers in STEM (and all Deltas!). I am grateful that Aunt Vone, a math teacher in the Norfolk public school system for 35 years, is here with us today. As a sixth grader growing up on a college campus, I had always understood academics as essentially split between the hard sciences the women in my family taught and the humanities. Sadie T.M. Alexander's work imparted three important lessons that would act as a compass. First, she helped me discover the world of social sciences, an academic middle ground with the structure of the hard sciences and the seemingly infinite research possibilities it contained. Second, she showed me not just what could be studied, but what kind of questions should be asked. Third, she helped me understand that how we search for answers matters as much as the question itself. Each of these settled on, and stayed with, me in different and illuminating ways. The first lesson was like a lightbulb—immediate, clear, bright. There was so much to be studied, the only limitation seemed to be the hours in a day. The second lesson was like a sunrise—dawning with beauty and growing steadily stronger. There were so many questions I needed to ask, and each one led to another, while every answer opened a new line of inquiry. And the more I asked, the better the questions became. The third lesson was like a supermoon—towering, imposing, but looming so closely, it seems like you could reach out and touch it with your hand. I knew that the way I sought answers would matter to my work, but it would take time to fully understand why and how. I can see each of those lessons in that photo. The first question I wanted to ask was inspired by Dr. Alexander: What are the major causes of unemployment among Black Americans? I began to realize that curiosity is shaped by our experiences and perspectives. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander was a pioneer because of her intellect. But she also broke new research ground by posing questions no other economist had thought to ask, because they were questions about people who were not represented in the field. As Deltas have known for a long time, in 1921, Dr. Alexander was the first African American to earn a Ph.D. in economics. More than half a century later, I understood from her experience that there was still a universe of untracked data, unresearched areas, and unasked questions. And like the celestial expanse, we have really only plumbed a fraction of their contents. Here was an opportunity not just to explore, but to discover. Finally, that picture captures the first time I really dug into records in search of answers to my never-ending questions. Actual paper records—no Google, no Wikipedia, no Siri, no Alexa, no websites, no PCs, and no Internet. And I used graph paper, a ruler, and a pencil to plot the data! It seems primitive now, but it was excellent training for the years to come. I used similar methods to collect data for my doctoral dissertation; although this time, rather than the Milledgeville office of the Georgia Department of Labor, I was marching down to the Moscow office of the Goskomstat, the Russian federal statistical agency. I believe these seeds planted by Dr. Sadie T.M. Alexander introduced me to my calling. Economics was not necessarily a done deal—I thought I might do a Ph.D. in philosophy at one point, when I was studying philosophy at Oxford University and at the Université Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar in Senegal. But economics turned out to be my purpose and my passion. Economics is the fundamental toolkit I use to find answers to the multitude of questions swirling around my head at any given moment. I see economics at work in everyday life and know how foundational it is to every society and community's success. There is a passage from an Alice Dunbar-Nelson poem—because why quote the rest when Deltas are the best—that goes: How few of us In all the world's great, ceaseless struggling strife, Go to our work with gladsome, buoyant step, And love it for its sake, whate'er it be. Delta's dedication to learning and public service gave us an advantage in considering the mission that would occupy our lives. We thought about the change we could make and the influence we could have. We did the advanced calculus that measured the goodness of trouble against the enormity of student debt payments. We knew we wanted work—whether a professional calling or life's work—that, as Soror Alice said, we loved "for its sake." While I do not always have a buoyant step, and "gladsome" is probably not the first word I would use to describe myself, I do love my work for its sake, which is a tremendous gift. And I was drawn to Delta, because I wanted to be surrounded by people who would use their talents and passions to improve the lives and well-being of all people in the world. Why am I bringing this up today? I am sticking to the assignment: Deltas embracing the past and shaping the future. We are here to commemorate our founders, our forebears, and the ties that bind us. To celebrate the ways that Delta's esteemed history brought each of us through its doors, and how membership helped to shape who we are and who we are yet to become. And Delta, along with other Divine Nine organizations, can be key to shaping the future of economics. Diversity is critical to any profession, but particularly to those—like economics—that tend toward the homogenous. Or those—like economics—that affect people's daily lives. As policymakers, my colleagues and I make decisions that impact the entire country. We are driven by data, which we collect in abundance. But our own experiences, including our education, professional experience, and personal understanding, inform how we seek out that data and discern what it means for the future. As with any discipline, different perspectives formulate different questions whose answers reveal new truths. Economic conundrums persist, including disparities in pay, economic mobility, and generational wealth. Solutions are more likely to come if each wave of newly minted economists reflects the makeup of the country. And both the country and the profession need the deepest, broadest talent pool possible to keep up with a constantly evolving economy. I believe Delta can be a source of momentum by harnessing its core virtues of sisterhood, scholarship, service, and social action. Through sisterhood. If we had a network of support and mentorship for economics that mirrored those we have in politics and law, we could help some of our brightest minds find a home in economics. Those networks help students and young professionals navigate everything from finding internship opportunities to pairing them with mentors and champions. They also serve as examples. It is easier to envision a successful future—and to feel welcome in the present—when you see yourself represented in a profession or institution. On all the rungs of the career ladder. Deltas walking into law firms know, on their first day of work, that they have a chance to make partner. Fun fact: The first Delta I met at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was, you guessed it, in the legal division. I want future Delta economists—and every other underrepresented budding policymaker—to have that same certainty. I had many mentors throughout my career, from a variety of backgrounds. I would not be where I am today—here, standing in a position of honor in front of 1,100 Deltas—without them. But if I had not heard of Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander, I might not have felt such a strong connection to social science and economics quite as early as the sixth grade. Through scholarship. Sadie T.M. Alexander was a model of intellectual curiosity and rigor. She was determined and she was disciplined. To remind you of the history we learned through Delta, she scaled a mountain when she became the first African American, of any gender, to receive an economics Ph.D. When that scholarship and natural talent was ignored, and prejudice denied her the place she had earned in the profession, she showed resolve and grace by turning around and getting a J.D., also at the University of Pennsylvania—and securing another "first." She still used her economic knowledge, as you know, in her legal work and lifelong campaign for civil rights. Our Sorors have broken barriers, and I have no doubt that Deltas will help bring down the last to fall. I hope that as we recognize the work they put in, we also celebrate the parts that come from advantage. I feel a kinship with Sadie Alexander for our shared intellectual interests and the similarities in our lives. One of the most consequential of those parallels is the importance our families placed on education, and the examples they set. I had my mother and aunts, not to mention a host of uncles and siblings who made their own marks in the academy, civil rights activism, and the pulpit. Each generation had a hand in desegregating institutions, schools, programs, and classrooms. Sadie's aunt was Hallie Tanner Dillon Johnson, the first female physician to practice in Alabama and the founder of the Tuskegee nursing school. Her father was the first African American man to graduate from Penn law school, and her uncle held the same distinction at Penn's medical school. And—just like me, I realized in the sixth grade—her relatives desegregated institutions and worked for civil rightsandshe had a preacher for a grandfather. Children and grandchildren of preachers share a special connection from having the fear of God put into us early and often. Through service. Sadie T.M. Alexander's career focused on obtaining justice and serving the community. Her economic research would factor into all she did, including her knowledge that economic and civic equality could only be reached through full employment—maximum employment being one half of the "dual mandate," along with price stability, that Congress has assigned the Fed. More symmetry. Both of us viewed our fields with unique perspectives, informed by our daily experiences and by occasions of history we saw firsthand. Sadie Alexander saw the Great Depression up close, and the real-life impact of disparities in labor market opportunities. I was fascinated by the same questions decades later and felt a renewed urgency as I watched the fallout of the Global Financial Crisis from the heart of industrial Michigan. I first noticed the once-unimposing campus food bank when lines of students began to form at its doors. Indeed, I feel a great sense of honor in being allowed to serve the public in this capacity. And a great sense of purpose comes with knowing that I am able to use the best of my talents and the breadth of my professional passion to help protect the public from experiencing such a fallout again. And through social action. I may feel that honor more acutely, because I know it was not one available to my spiritual mentor. Despite her talent, work, and potential to transform the field—or perhaps because of it—Dr. Alexander was not able to practice her chosen profession. She went on to be a rock star in another competitive arena, which is a tidy and valiant coda. But it will always stick with me that despite the success of her plan B, she was not allowed to do the thing she loved, the thing she naturally connected with, the way I was. To me, "social action" is telling all the Deltas—in this room and in every chapter around the globe—who are still contemplating their educational and career paths to consider economics. I am specifically speaking to the students, but if you are thinking of a career change, this includes you, too. It is an important field that touches virtually every aspect of daily life. It is a challenging field—which Deltas are made for—that has so much left to explore. It is a possibility-rich field that remains largely homogenous and needs different perspectives, research approaches, life experiences, and backgrounds to enrich its study and improve its outcomes. In short, it is a field that embodies Delta's roots in sisterhood, scholarship, service, and social change. And even if you do not embark on a career in economics, think about taking a few classes. I promise that the skills you learn will be useful in the future. When Soror Aunt Loretta retired from being chair of the math department at Virginia State University in the mid-1990s, she founded and led an investment club with retired friends, colleagues, and neighbors in the Petersburg area. And their portfolios typically outperformed the market because of their new interest in economics and finance. While the economics profession was open to me in a way that it was not for Sadie Alexander, it still has had its hurdles. I learned early on that one of the parallels between our lives—the importance our families placed on education—was an advantage so big it was almost a superpower. It never occurred to me that someone might assume I was bad at math. Between my mother, my aunts, my extended family, and my parents' friends, I had essentially understood STEM to be women's work. When I encountered people who thought I should not be there—like the other graduate students who introduced themselves by quizzing me on mathematical principles—I was honestly more baffled than incredulous. In truth, those voices probably started much earlier—I just had not heard them. Research by the economist Dania V. Francis shows that Black girls are disproportionately under-recommended by teachers for AP calculus, which is a gateway course for economics; for STEM classes; and for college preparation in general.1 I had mentors who encouraged my work, and they were essential to blocking out the voices saying I did not belong. I needed those champions and resolved to be one myself. I told and continue to tell my former students in the American Economic Association's Summer Program all the time, and I will say it to all of you: You belong here. Your insights are unique, and the profession would benefit from them. It is not too late, you are not too far behind, and you can even come late to the decision to study economics and still thrive. The other thing that helped to drown out the negative voices was understanding history—our own and my own, Sadie T.M. Alexander's and Delta's. All of those individual paths and all the places that they intersect. Knowing our history is powerful. Charlayne Hunter-Gault, the pioneering journalist—and, obviously, Delta—calls that history "our armor." She also says it is the wind at our backs. We have to claim that history; let it infuse us, guide us, and be our center. I tell my sisters at Spelman, my sisters in Delta, all young Black women, and all women, whether young or older: You have to block out the noise. I learned that desegregating schools in Georgia, and I carried it with me throughout my career. Block out the noise of low expectations for your own sake. And use that history to your advantage. To quote another Delta—because I can do this all day—"challenges make you discover things about yourself that you never really knew. They're what make the instrument stretch; what make you go beyond the norm." Thank you, Cicely Tyson! I hope the history of our first national president, Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander, will continue to encourage you, as it did me, to explore economics as a career and as a way to understand and impact the world around us. There is not much that Deltas cannot conquer—we have gone to Congress, to the President's cabinet, to Fortune 500 companies, and to space. And to the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors! I hope to see some of you in the same halls one day. I told the story of my seventh grade social science project—and that photo—at the ceremonial swearing-in for new Fed governors. I did not tell the follow-up story, which happened on my first day. I was still absorbing the magnitude of this job, walking the hallways of one of the most revered institutions in my profession, when I came face-to-face with a portrait of Dr. Alexander. It was a joy to see her recognized, and it felt like a preordained meeting—another milestone on my journey marked by the spirit of Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander and Delta Sigma Theta. Thank you. 1. See Lisa D. Cook and Anna Gifty Opoku-Agyeman (2019), "It Was a Mistake for Me to Choose This Field,"New York Times,September 30.Return to text
Vice Chair Lael Brainard At the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois Inflation has declined in recent months, which is important for American households, businesses, and consumers. Inflation is high, and it will take time and resolve to get it back down to 2 percent. We are determined to stay the course.1 Financial conditions have tightened considerably over the last year as the Federal Reserve and foreign central banks have tightened policy. Real yields have risen significantly across the curve over the past year: 2-year yields on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) have risen more than 4-1/2 percentage points to 2.1 percent, and 10-year TIPS yields have risen more than 2-1/4 percentage points to 1.2 percent. Short-term real interest rates have moved into decidedly positive territory.2Mortgage rates have doubled.3 Inflation has been declining over the past several months against a backdrop of moderate growth. Yesterday's industrial production index points to a significant weakening in the manufacturing sector, and the retail sales report points to a further moderation in consumer spending. Looking forward, weaker readings on real income, wealth, and sentiment, along with indicators of spending on services, such as the ISM services index, point to subdued growth in 2023.4Real disposable personal income declined, on net, at an annual rate of 4.1 percent in the first three quarters of 2022, suggesting that recent consumption has been supported by running down pandemic savings and greater reliance on credit.5In particular, savings among low-income households appear to be lower and to have declined more rapidly than was previously appreciated.6 The widespread expectation for U.S. growth to be below potential over 2022 and 2023 reflects significant tightening in both fiscal and monetary policy in an environment of broader global tightening. The expiration of previous fiscal stimulus imposed a substantial drag on real U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 2022, whereas fiscal policy is expected to make a modest contribution over the next few years, in line with its longer-run average. By contrast, the drag on U.S. growth and employment from monetary policy is likely to increase in 2023 because of transmission lags from the rapid, large swing from accommodation to restraint in 2022. From March to December 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) undertook a large cumulative tightening in the stance of monetary policy by raising the policy rate 4-1/4 percentage points and shrinking the balance sheet. Although financial conditions adjust immediately to reflect expected and actual changes in monetary policy, the full adjustment of output, employment, and inflation occurs with a lag.7Given the speed and magnitude of the swing in the stance of monetary policy, the lagged effects of earlier accommodation likely offset some of the initial effects of tightening over the course of 2022, and it is likely that the full effect on demand, employment, and inflation of the cumulative tightening that is in the pipeline still lies ahead. That said, there is uncertainty about the timing and magnitude. With that in mind, let's turn to the implications for the employment leg of our dual mandate. In contrast to the slowing of output growth, labor markets remained tight throughout 2022, with layoffs remaining below pre-pandemic levels and the unemployment rate ending the year at 3.5 percent, its historical low. Quit rates and the ratio of job postings to job seekers also remain elevated, although they are off their peaks from early in the year. Recent declines in average weekly hours, temporary-help services, and monthly payrolls growth suggest tentative signs that labor demand is cooling. Employment at temporary-help services firms—a good leading indicator—peaked in July 2022 and has been declining since then, ending the year only slightly above its December 2019 level. Similarly, average weekly hours have declined: After peaking in early 2021 and remaining elevated through May 2022, average weekly hours have declined and now stand at the bottom of the range for this metric over the five years before the pandemic. The continued decline in average weekly hours is notable because this margin is among the easiest to adjust by firms facing declining demand, especially those who may be reluctant to undertake layoffs following the challenges encountered in restoring employment following the pandemic-induced layoffs. In addition, average payrolls growth in the Bureau of Labor Statistics' establishment survey fell from 540,000 jobs per month in the first quarter of 2022 to 250,000 jobs per month in the fourth quarter. That said, labor supply appears likely to remain constrained. On net, the labor force participation rate flattened out over 2022 at a level that is about 1 percentage point lower than pre-pandemic, primarily reflecting an estimated 2.5 million in excess retirements, as well as some impact from long COVID.8Immigration has also been low in recent years.9 Despite constrained supply, wages do not appear to be driving inflation in a 1970s-style wage–price spiral. It is true that wages have grown faster than the pace consistent with 2 percent inflation and productivity growth. It is also true that wages have grown slower than inflation over the past two years, and that aggregate real wages have fallen. It appears that workers in lower-wage sectors who saw high pandemic layoffs initially and benefited from job switching subsequently as businesses scrambled to hire have seen wage gains in real terms. However, in the aggregate, the gains among lower-wage workers were more than offset by real wage declines among middle- and higher-wage workers in the context of a broader compression in the real wage distribution, as David Autor points out.10Overall, the labor share of income has declined over the past two years and appears to be at or below pre-pandemic levels, while corporate profits as a share of GDP remain near postwar highs. Retail markups in a number of sectors have seen material increases in what could be described as a price–price spiral, whereby final prices have risen by more than the increases in input prices.11The compression of these markups as supply constraints ease, inventories rise, and demand cools could contribute to disinflationary pressures. There are tentative signs that wage growth is moderating. Growth in average hourly earnings has softened recently—stepping down to 4.1 percent annualized growth on a 3-month basis in December from roughly 4.5 percent on a 6-month and 12-month basis. I will be watching to see whether the employment cost index data at the end of this month show the deceleration from the third quarter continuing into the fourth quarter. Let's now turn to the inflation leg of our dual mandate. Inflation has declined in recent months from very high levels. With the consumer price index and producer price index now available, total PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation in December is likely to have run at around a 2.3 percent annualized pace on a 3- and 6-month basis, as compared with 5.1 percent on a 12-month basis. This deceleration reflects an easing in war-related energy shocks as well as in core goods inflation: Energy and core goods each subtracted nearly three-fourths of 1 percentage point from 3-month annualized total PCE inflation. The declines in energy and core goods are a reversal of previous large increases and are expected to moderate. Core PCE inflation is running at a 3.1 percent annualized pace on a 3-month basis—below its 3.8 percent reading on a 6-month basis and 4.5 percent on a 12-month basis. Within this, recent declines in core goods inflation reflect a reduction in core import prices, an easing of supply chains, a restocking of inventories, and cooling demand. Core goods prices are likely to flatten out once earlier large gains reverse, in the absence of new shocks, and overall core inflation could move up somewhat for a time as a result. In that regard, housing services inflation remains stubbornly high at 8.8 percent on a 3-month basis—compared with 7.7 percent on a 12-month basis. Housing services are making an annualized contribution to core PCE that is more than double their contribution before the pandemic. That said, the housing sector is highly interest sensitive, and the most recent reading of one national indicator pointed to house prices having declined 2.5 percent over the five months ending in November.12Similarly, rents based on new leases are decelerating sharply.13Although it is currently offset by catch-up in renewing leases, the decline in rent on new leases will show through to average rent over time, and declines in housing services inflation are expected by the third quarter of this year.14 In addition, nonhousing services are running at about 4.4 percent annualized inflation on a 3-month basis, similar to their 12-month pace. There are a range of views on what it will take to bring down this component of inflation to pre-pandemic levels. Since wages constitute a significant fraction of costs for most firms in nonhousing services, one possible channel is through a weakening in labor demand. That said, to the extent that inputs other than wages may have been responsible in part for important price increases for some nonhousing service sectors, an unwinding of these factors could help bring down nonhousing services inflation. There is some recent evidence that the persistent components of inflation in core goods and nonhousing services, particularly transportation, recreation, and food services and accommodation, have behaved similarly, peaking around early 2022 and steadily declining since then.15To the extent that the persistent components of these nonhousing services and core goods reflect common factors that are fading, such as pass-through from commodity and supply chain shocks, they are unlikely to be as cyclically persistent, as long as inflation expectations are well anchored.16 Of course, an extended period of high goods and services inflation resulting from a series of demand and supply shocks associated with the pandemic and the war could lead to a rise in inflation expectations, which would make it much more difficult to bring inflation down.17That is why it has been important for monetary policy to take a risk-management posture to defend the expectations anchor. And the evidence from market- and survey-based measures suggests that longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored, while year-ahead measures have recently declined but remain elevated. Together, the price trends in core goods and nonhousing services, the tentative indications of some deceleration in wages, the evidence of anchored expectations, and the scope for margin compression may provide some reassurance that we are not currently experiencing a 1970s‑style wage–price spiral. For these reasons, it remains possible that a continued moderation in aggregate demand could facilitate continued easing in the labor market and reduction in inflation without a significant loss of employment.18 Nonetheless, substantial uncertainty remains. Further shocks associated with the war and the pandemic are possible. While there has been some improvement in the outlook for activity and inflation in Europe, there is uncertainty about the implications of China's exit from zero COVID for global demand and inflation, especially in commodities. Turning to the implications for policy, my colleagues and I are committed to restoring price stability. The FOMC moved policy into restrictive territory at a rapid pace and subsequently downshifted the pace of increases in the target range at its most recent meeting. This will enable us to assess more data as we move the policy rate closer to a sufficiently restrictive level, taking into account the risks around our dual-mandate goals. In parallel, balance sheet runoff is continuing. Even with the recent moderation, inflation remains high, and policy will need to be sufficiently restrictive for some time to make sure inflation returns to 2 percent on a sustained basis. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis for his assistance on these remarks. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For instance, the expected 3-month T-bill rate is currently 4.7 percent, 1.5 percentage points above the 3‑month 3.2 percent median projection of the 2023:Q1 annualized total PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation rate in the January Blue Chip survey.Return to text 3. In addition, over the course of the past year, investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond spreads over Treasury securities have widened by roughly 50 basis points and 100 basis points, respectively; broad equity prices have declined by 17 percent; and the trade-weighted dollar has appreciated by about 4 percent on net. The Federal Reserve's broad trade-weighted dollar index is based on 26 currencies of major U.S. trading partners. It is published in Statistical Release H.10, "Foreign Exchange Rates," available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h10/current/default.htm.Return to text 4. The Institute for Supply Management's services index fell by 6.9 points to contractionary territory at 49.6 in December, reflecting declines in the subindexes for business activity, new orders, and employment.Return to text 5. Total credit card balances were $1.19 trillion in November, relative to $1.09 trillion in December 2019, and the share of borrowers with consumer loans in delinquency has rebounded to pre-pandemic levels. For more information on credit card balances, see Statistical Release G.19, "Consumer Credit," available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/current/default.htm.Return to text 6. For a recent assessment of savings since the onset of the pandemic and a decomposition of excess savings across income quartiles, see Aditya Aladangady, David Cho, Laura Feiveson, and Eugenio Pinto (2022), "Excess Savings during the COVID-19 Pandemic," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 21).Return to text 7. Romer and Romer (2004) and Gertler and Karadi (2015) find that it takes about 9 and 12 months, respectively, for monetary policy actions to begin to affect inflation and additional time for that effect to peak. In contrast, Bauer and Swanson (2022) find that inflation effects from monetary policy occur much sooner and peak within the first 10 months. See Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (2004), "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,"American Economic Review,vol. 94 (September), pp. 1055–84; Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi (2015), "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 44–76; and Michael D. Bauer and Eric T. Swanson (2022), "A Reassessment of Monetary Policy Surprises and High-Frequency Identification," in Martin Eichenbaum, Erik Hurst, and Valerie A. Ramey, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2022,vol. 37 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). In addition, recent research suggests that there may have been an acceleration in the maximum effect on inflation following the broader use of balance sheet and forward-guidance tools in 2009, bringing the arrival of that maximum effect from three years to as little as 12 months, though considerable uncertainty surrounds that estimate. See Taeyoung Doh and Andrew T. Foerster (2022), "Have Lags in Monetary Policy Transmission Shortened?" Economic Bulletin (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December).Return to text 8. A discussion of the labor market impact of long COVID can be found in Price (2022) and the references within. See Brendan M. Price (2022), "Long COVID, Cognitive Impairment, and the Stalled Decline in Disability Rates," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 5).Return to text 9. By one estimate, the changes in immigration policy since 2016, in combination with the pandemic travel restrictions, reduced the total level of immigration by 3.4 million people over the period from 2016 to 2021. As the authors of this study note, according to the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey, around 50 percent of immigrants from 2001 to 2020 joined the labor force within a year of their arrival. See Elior Cohen and Samantha Shampine (2022), "Immigration Shortfall May Be a Headwind for Labor Supply," Economic Bulletin (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, May).Return to text 10. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2022), "The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low WageEconomy,"lecture delivered atMarkus' Academy, Bendheim Center for Finance, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. (via webcast), December 8.Return to text 11. Since the pandemic, significant supply and demand imbalances have coincided with large increases in retail trade margins in several sectors, increases that have exceeded the contemporaneous increase in wages paid to the workers in those sectors. For example, since the end of 2019, retail trade margins for food and grocery retailers increased by about 25 percent, outstripping the growth in average hourly earnings for workers in that sector, which was just under 19 percent. A similar gap exists between margin and wage increases for general merchandise retailers, which were 24 percent and 14 percent, respectively.Return to text 12. The CoreLogic Home Price Index peaked in June 2022 and has declined in each month through November 2022. More information is available at https://www.corelogic.com/intelligence/u-s-home-price-insights-january-2023/.Return to text 13. The CoreLogic Single-Family Rent Index shows a significant deceleration over the 7 months ending in November, including negative month over month rent growth in September through November; see CoreLogic (2023), "CoreLogic: US Annual Rent Growth Drops for the Seventh Straight Month in November," January 17, https://www.corelogic.com/intelligence/corelogic-us-annual-rent-growth-drops-for-the-seventh-straight-month-in-november/.Return to text 14. For a recent analysis of the lead–lag relationship between indexes of market rents for new tenants and the indexes of average rent for all tenants, see Brian Adams, Lara Loewenstein, Hugh Montag, and Randal J. Verbrugge (2022), "Disentangling Rent Index Differences: Data, Methods, and Scope," Working Paper Series 22-38 (Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December).Return to text 15. See Martín Almuzara, Marek Jarocinski, and Argia Sbordone (2023), "The Layers of Inflation Persistence," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), January 5.Return to text 16. And, of course, the reemergence of additional shocks to commodities and intermediate inputs is possible.Return to text 17. For a discussion of supply shocks and monetary policy in the context of recent events, see Lael Brainard (2022), "What Can We Learn from the Pandemic and the War about Supply Shocks, Inflation, and Monetary Policy?" summary of remarks delivered as part of a panel at the Bank for International Settlements Annual Meeting on June 24, Basel, Switzerland.Return to text 18. For a description of one path to such an outcome, see Andrew Figura and Chris Waller (2022), "What Does the Beveridge Curve Tell Us about the Likelihood of a Soft Landing?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 29).Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2023 Allied Social Science Associations (ASSA) Annual Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana I am particularly pleased to be here today for multiple reasons. I think most of us feel some nostalgic pull to these meetings, though I do not think I want to revisit the frantic interview cycle ever again. These meetings allow us to meet and reconnect with colleagues, hear about new and valuable research, and have in-depth discussions on the subtler, more nuanced aspects of economics. I hope to do that today with my co-panelists on a subject that has my and the Federal Open Market Committee's full attention: inflation. I want to use my time to outline the unique set of challenges facing policymakers and academics today as well as how we can better understand inflation dynamics in this new environment, including by looking at novel data sources.1 The effects of the pandemic and Russia's war against Ukraine have turned a spotlight on the supply side of the economy and its ability to adapt to rapid changes in demand and to navigate a seemingly never-ending sequence of adverse supply shocks. The unique nature of the supply and demand imbalances over the past couple of years has made it more difficult to forecast inflation, posing new challenges for monetary policy. One way to better manage these challenges is by continuing to monitor—and even expand—new sources of data. Additionally, we have some key issues to consider in approaching revised models of inflation behavior. Before I turn to broader issues with modeling inflation, let me start with the recent inflation data. Inflation remains far too high, despite some encouraging signs lately, and is therefore of great concern. As a Fed policymaker, I am committed to bringing inflation back to our 2 percent goal. The 12-month change in total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices through November was 5.5 percent. Core PCE prices rose 4.7 percent over the same 12-month period (figure 1). This measure omits volatile food and energy prices and tends to give a more accurate signal of total inflation's trajectory. Both figures are down a bit from the peaks reached in the first half of last year. However, monthly data are quite volatile, so I would caution against putting too much weight on the past few favorable monthly data reports. The high and volatile inflation seen over the past two years appears to reflect rapid shifts in demand, coupled with supply-chain disruptions. This has led to sizable demand–supply imbalances across different sectors. To analyze these influences, I find it useful to consider core inflation in three categories corresponding to distinct components of consumer spending: core goods inflation, housing services inflation, and inflation in core services other than housing (figure 2). In contrast to core goods inflation, which has declined over the past year, housing services inflation has continued to rise rapidly, and inflation in other core services has been little changed on balance. In the current environment, I find it helpful to examine a number of somewhat new indicators when assessing inflation pressures within each category. Starting with goods inflation, I have been closely observing indicators of capacity constraints along global and domestic supply chains. Shortages, bottlenecks, and other logistical issues have hampered production and boosted distribution costs for a significantly longer period than we had anticipated a couple of years ago. Fortunately, many indicators suggest that shortages of inputs have abated, and transportation costs have started to fall. For example, the list of industrial inputs that respondents to the Institute for Supply Management's (ISM) manufacturing survey indicate are in short supply is now shorter than it was at its peak at the end of 2021 (figure 3). Supply constraints are far from fully resolved, however, and respondents to the December ISM survey still reported difficulty procuring items such as electrical and hydraulic components, rubber and steel products, and—of course—semiconductors. The supply of semiconductors has been a particularly strong driver of inflation in the motor vehicle sector and has affected that sector's ability to produce vehicles—a matter I highlighted in a speech in Detroit in late November.2 In assessing the degree to which shortages of materials and other inputs are constraining goods production, I have been following the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization, which asks firms whether production in their plants was below full capacity in a particular quarter and the reasons for any shortfalls (figure 4). These data show a decline over the past year in the number of plants that continue to operate below full capacity due to logistical challenges as well as parts or labor shortages.3Yet those readings remained quite elevated in the third quarter of last year relative to rates observed before the pandemic. Turning to housing, a sector in which demand has been quite strong since the onset of the pandemic, the housing services component of core PCE has continued to register rapid increases. However, the housing services index tends to adjust quite slowly, as it measures the rise in rents for all tenants, including those with continuing leases, and the rise in the rental-equivalent cost of owner-occupied housing. Changes in the rental market are reflected in measures of average rents with a lag. Partly for this reason, I find it useful to consult market rents paid for new leases, which are a more timely indicator of how housing services prices are likely to change over the next 6 to 12 months (figure 5). Available measures of market rents suggest that the price increases for new tenant leases have slowed substantially over the past year. Some monthly measures have barely increased or even declined recently. This pattern may in part reflect the easing of some special factors that shifted demand during the peak of the pandemic, such as the surge in work from home and the associated increase in demand for bigger homes located in smaller metro areas or further from city centers. Because these shifts in demand happened much more rapidly than the response in housing supply, rents increased quite significantly, especially for single-family detached homes. Some of this shift in demand may have stabilized over the past year as the pandemic has waned, amenities and cultural activities in urban areas have re-opened, and more workers have returned to the office (figure 6). Although PCE housing services prices will likely increase further in the coming months as renters renew their leases, the deceleration in market rents suggests this process should slow appreciably over the course of this year. Lastly, inflation in other core services—a large category that covers activities as varied as travel and recreation to medical and legal services—has remained stubbornly high. As my colleagues and I have noted in the past, an important source of inflation pressures in this category is the shortage of workers, which has pushed up labor costs at rates above those consistent with 2 percent inflation. The inflation outlook for this non-housing category of core services partly depends on whether growth in nominal labor costs comes back down, and recent data suggest that labor-compensation growth has indeed started to decelerate somewhat over the past year. In addition to keeping close tabs on measures of labor costs, I have found it valuable to use some high-frequency indicators of services spending, particularly in the leisure & hospitality and travel sectors (figure 7). Even as the effects of the pandemic overall appear to be subsiding, the ebbs and flows in the spread of the COVID-19 virus (in addition to other respiratory viruses) continue to add significant volatility to monthly inflation readings in these sectors. Crucially, we must be vigilant to ensure that pandemic-era cost pressures and disruptions do not have lasting effects on inflation. If cost shocks and supply disruptions keep inflation elevated for a long enough period, households' and firms' inflation expectations could move higher—a development that could put additional upward pressure on inflation. Accordingly, I look at a variety of measures of inflation expectations—near- and long-term, as well as survey- and market-based—that cover many different participants in the economy. Since the onset of the pandemic, medians of many surveys of longer-run measures suggest that inflation expectations are still within their pre-pandemic ranges, despite having come up a little. This is consistent with overall PCE price increases declining to a 2 percent pace. Market-based measures of inflation compensation beyond the near term, such as those derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS, tell a similar story. I have also looked beyond the headlines of the survey data to assess how inflation expectations are moving and responding to the current high-inflation environment. For example, in the Michigan Surveys of Consumers, we can compare households' perceptions of past inflation to their expectations of future inflation at the 1-year and 5-to-10-year horizons (figure 8). The comparisons show that while households have raised their inflation expectations over the past few years, especially for the short-term measure, the increases were far less than one-for-one with how much they perceived inflation had already risen. I will monitor these comparisons to ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored. Any de-anchoring of expectations would be a major concern, as it could cause the high inflation that we have been experiencing to prove more persistent. Looking ahead, the outlook for inflation will depend, in part, on how the factors restraining supply responses and boosting cost pressures in each of these three main PCE price categories play out. I think it is quite possible that the organization of production and supply chains will look different in the coming years from the way they did before the pandemic, as firms evaluate some newly exposed tradeoffs between keeping costs low and supplies available. We should keep a close eye on the incoming indicators of production disruptions and bottlenecks. We should also advance our understanding of how an environment of more frequent disruptions to the production and distribution systems will affect potential output, feed into inflation, and become an important element in forecasting inflation, assessing risks, and adjusting monetary policy. We must also continue to advance our understanding of inflation and its underlying structural causal relationships as well as our ability to forecast risks. Progress in these areas would help us better assess developments in real time. Some questions deserve further attention and study. As sectoral supply–demand imbalances have played a key role in understanding inflation in recent years, would adopting a model with multiple price components improve our understanding of and ability to forecast overall inflation? Relatedly, should we look to inflation models with nonlinear or threshold effects, which could capture, among other things, supply constraints? The pandemic has had a much more prolonged effect on labor supply than many expected, and rapid nominal wage growth has accompanied the recent rise in inflation in ways that traditional measures of labor market tightness—such as the unemployment rate gap—might not be capturing. Many analysts have used data on job vacancies to go beyond a simple unemployment rate gap indicator, and I see merit in such approaches. We should ask how we can better understand the relations among realizations of inflation, inflation expectations, and the rate of inflation to which the economy would gravitate after the effects of temporary shocks have ebbed. Finally, we should consider if there are ways to better anticipate structural breaks in the inflation process. For example, inflation could become a nonstationary time-series process if inflation expectations were to become de-anchored. The responses to these questions lie in further research—research that will be made richer, more useful, and, hopefully, easier if we expand our data sources to include more real-time and other novel indicators. When the economy is disrupted by a once-in-a-century event, there is no such thing as too much data and too much analysis. Thank you. 1. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Lisa D. Cook (2022),"The Economic Outlook and U.S. Productivity,"speech delivered at the Detroit Economic Club, Detroit, Michigan, November 30.Return to text 3. For information on the checkbox data from the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization, see Jessica Stahl and Norman Morin (2013),"Looking for Shortages of Skilled Labor in the Manufacturing Sector,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 26); and Justin Pierce and Emily Wisniewski (2018),"Some Characteristics of the Decline in Manufacturing Capacity Utilization,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 1).Return to text *On January 9, 2023, a revised version of Figure 2 was posted. In the original version, the line intending to show the price index for core PCE services ex. housing was instead showing the price index for core PCE services. Accessible Version