The federal bank regulatory agencies today reported in the 2022 Shared National Credit (SNC) report that credit quality associated with large syndicated bank loans improved in 2022, but noted the results do not fully reflect increasing interest rates and softening economic conditions that began to impact borrowers in the second half of 2022. Overall, the report finds that credit risks for syndicated loans—large loans originated by multiple banks—were moderate at the end of the review period. While risks to borrowers impacted by COVID-19 have declined, they remain high for leveraged loans, as well as the entertainment, recreation, and transportation services industries. The 2022 review, which evaluates the quality of large, syndicated loans, was conducted by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and reflects the examination of SNC loans originated on or before June 30, 2022. Consistent with the approach taken in 2021, it focused on borrowers in five industries that were affected significantly by the pandemic: entertainment and recreation; oil and gas; commercial real estate; retail; and transportation services. The 2022 SNC portfolio included 6,214 borrowers, totaling $5.9 trillion in commitments, an increase of 13.9 percent from a year ago. The percentage of loans that deserve management's close attention (loans rated non-pass, including special mention and classified SNC commitments) decreased from 10.6 percent of total commitments to 7.0 percent year over year. Nearly half of total SNC commitments are leveraged loans, and commitments to borrowers in industries affected by COVID-19 represent about one-fifth of total SNC commitments. For leveraged borrowers that also operate in COVID-19 affected industries, non-pass loans decreased to 18.9 percent, but remain above the 13.5 percent observed in 2019. While U.S. banks hold nearly 45 percent of all SNC commitments, they hold only 21 percent of non-pass loans. 2022 SNC Program Review Report (PDF)
Federal bank regulatory agencies today issued a joint statement highlighting liquidity risks to banking organizations associated with certain sources of funding from crypto-asset-related entities and some effective practices to manage those risks. Recent events in the crypto-asset sector have underscored the potential heightened liquidity risks presented by certain sources of funding from crypto-asset-related entities. The joint statement highlights key liquidity risks and some effective practices to monitor and appropriately manage those risks. The statement reminds banking organizations to apply existing risk management principles; it does not create new risk management principles. Banking organizations are neither prohibited nor discouraged from providing banking services to customers of any specific class or type, as permitted by law or regulation. Joint Statement on Liquidity Risks to Banking Organizations Resulting from Crypto-Asset Market Vulnerabilities (PDF)
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York Thank you very much for inviting me to discuss this paper. It is a timely review for central bankers charged with lowering inflation to targets or, in the terminology of the authors, managing disinflation. I really enjoyed reading it. Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. My discussion time is limited. Therefore, I'll be selective.I will beginby briefly describing what the paper is about. Then, I will summarize the authors' takeaways from their analysis. Next, I will share my takeaways. Finally, I will offer some concluding remarks. So what is this paper about?Conceptually, the paper can be divided into three parts. In the first part, the authors review historical disinflationary episodes in the United States and other countries to see what lessons we might learn from past experience. In the second part, the authors present a simple, tractable model that relates interest rates, inflation, inflation expectations, and slack in the labor market. They use the model to make predictions about future inflation. In the third part, the authors provide advice to monetary policymakers on how to address the current situation; that is, how to manage disinflation. With that, let me cut to consideration of the authors' takeaways. The authors' first takeaway, based on past disinflation episodes in the United States and abroad, is that policymakers should expect that disinflation will be costly in terms of foregone output or employment. They find that all 16 of the large policy-induced disinflations in the four advanced economies they study were associated with a recession.1As the paper makes clear, however, a good measure of judgment comes into the exercise of identifying and quantifying disinflationary episodes. History is replete with confounding factors that make parsing difficult. These factors include supply shocks, labor market structure, economic conditions at the start of the disinflationary episode, how "well anchored" are inflation expectations, and the speed at which a disinflation is carried out. Even so, the authors are thorough in what they do. And while one may quibble with bits and pieces, their argument that policymakers should accept that disinflation is likely to be costly is well reasoned. The authors' second takeaway from history is that state dependencies or nonlinearities are also in play. The state dependency they note is that a higher initial inflation rate is associated with a lower sacrifice ratio. To explain this finding, they advance an argument based on policy credibility. Specifically, they argue that a high initial inflation rate enhances the plausibility of central banks' willingness to incur the cost of reducing inflation. That strikes me as plausible on its face, but there are other stories that may also apply. In the interest of brevity, let me point out just one. Central bankers are constantly warning of combatting inflationary shocks before those forces become embedded in inflation expectations.2The Volcker disinflation of 1981–82 resulted in a painful recession. But the reduction in inflation was large. Thus, measured in terms of percentage points of inflation reduction, as is conventionally done, it was not particularly costly.3A plausible, if partial, explanation for this finding is that the Volcker disinflation was carried outbeforethe inflation associated with the second OPEC oil price shock had become entrenched in inflation expectations and more generally at a time when inflation expectations were fluid.4This is relevant as my colleagues on the FOMC and I strive to bring down actual inflation promptly in order to preserve the "well anchored" longer-term inflation expectations we see in the data. It is also consistent with the authors' argument that swift and relatively painless disinflations of the past were due to early and sharp policy interest rate increases. The authors' third takeaway from history is that easing monetary policy before the disinflation is complete, or easing by too much, is costly.5My reading of this claim is that while central bankers might entertain hopes that they will directly see a dividend from early, forceful policy actions, historical experience suggests that they should not count on such a favorable outcome. And, finally, they argue that policy needs to look ahead and act preemptively. While the authors do not present evidence to support this claim, it is an argument with which policymakers nearly always agree, in principle, but find difficult to execute, in practice. As I'll discuss in a minute, choosing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, in real time, to influence expected future economic conditions is a difficult task in the best of circumstances. It is all that much more difficult when the economy is experiencing a once-in-a-century disturbance of worldwide significance. As you have already heard, the authors outlinea very simple modelthat relates interest rates, slack in the economy, inflation, and inflation expectations. They use this model to forecast inflation in the year 2021 and evaluate the model's predictive performance, employing alternative measures of slack, linear and nonlinear relationships, and different sample periods. Interestingly, the various measures of slack, and specifications for slack, make little difference. The models do a little better when you allow them to see data from the era of high and volatile inflation in the 1960s and '70s instead of restricting consideration to the Great Moderation period, as empirical tests for structural breaks would surely have suggested.6Two key and related reasons for this improvement are that inflation expectations in the 1960s and 1970s were more persistent and that the slope of the empirical Phillips curve was steeper than during recent history. The authors' policy takeawaysfall into two classes. First, there are the conclusions that pertain to the current situation. They suggest that the unusually large and rapid tightening in policy in 2022 was good policy. In particular, the authors contend, on page 19, that "the apparent anchoring of long-term [inflation] expectations may reflect in part the FOMC's unanticipated shift toward aggressive rate hikes." In addition, despite the rapid tightening to date, the authors contend that additional monetary policy tightening is likely to prove necessary to achieve 2 percent inflation by 2025 and is likely to lead to a mild recession. Second, there are the more general takeaways. The authors favor aggressive monetary policy tightening—or preemption—over gradualism. And they argue that the costs of increasing the target rate of inflation outweigh the benefits because the loss of credibility from showing a lack of resolve to achieve 2 percent inflation will persist. Now, let me share my takeaways.First, figure 4.1 in the paper demonstrates that, standing at the end of 2020, it would have been difficult to forecast the increase in inflation we observed in 2021 and 2022: The out-of-sample forecasts are far below the actual. This result stands despite the authors having benefited from knowledge of how economic forces played out that would not have been available in real time. Here, I emphasize the unprecedented nature of the pandemic, with its wide-reaching economic effects and comingling of economic and public health policies. It's just very difficult to formulate forecasts and implement preemptive monetary policy in real time, especially under such extraordinary circumstances. A corollary, of sorts, of this observation is that the idiosyncratic nature of the pandemic implies that economic models, while still useful in many respects, are going to have limited applicability. Taken at face value, the model assumes, as all models do, that the past tells policymakers what they need to know. But current inflation dynamics are being driven by some pandemic-specific factors not seen in the historical data. It follows that policymakers need to look at a broader range of factors to understand recent inflation dynamics. Let me illustrate this point by considering three large categories that make up core personal consumption expenditures inflation. These are core goods inflation, housing services inflation, and inflation in core services excluding housing. It's useful to look at these three categories separately because the driving forces behind each differ. Some of these forces are pandemic specific, and understanding the different causes should help us predict what will happen to inflation going forward. Focusing on the price of core goods, the black line in the chart, you can see how goods prices started climbing in the second half of 2020 and rose sharply in 2021 as the pandemic-driven disruptions to social interactions induced a rapid shift in demand from services to goods, exacerbating snags in global supply chains. By the end of 2021, once vaccines were developed and deployed and people slowly emerged from isolation, the shift in demand back to services began, and supply chain bottlenecks started to ease. Thus, inflation in this category came down substantially over the course of 2022. The strengthening of the overall economy may have played a role in core goods price inflation, but it was likely secondary to the roles played by goods-specific demand and by the production and distribution network for goods over this period. In contrast, housing services inflation, the blue line in the chart, picked up appreciably in 2022 after having softened early in the pandemic. Inflation in this sector is also driven by certain pandemic-specific factors. In particular, the surge in work from home led to an abrupt increase in the demand for bigger homes located in smaller metro areas or further from city centers. House prices and rents increased significantly. We have not seen a decline in housing services inflation yet, but recent data on new leases and lease renewals indicate that we soon will. Lastly, we have inflation in other core services, the red line in the graph, a large category that covers activities as varied as travel and recreation, and medical and legal services. Inflation for these services, most of which are labor intensive, has remained stubbornly high. An important source of inflation pressures in this category has likely been the shortage of workers, which has pushed up labor costs at rates above those consistent with 2 percent inflation. The inflation outlook for this nonhousing category of core services will likely depend in large part on whether labor demand moves into better balance with labor supply and growth in nominal labor costs. Recent data suggest that labor compensation has indeed started to decelerate somewhat over the past year but is still running too high to be consistent with returning inflation to 2 percent in a timely and sustainable fashion. The point is that the inflationary forces impinging on the U.S. economy at present represent a complex mixture of temporary and more long-lasting elements that defy simple, parsimonious explanation. The ongoing imbalance between the supply and demand for labor, combined with the large share of labor costs in the services sector, suggests that high inflation may come down only slowly. The paper notes the role of central bank credibility in managing disinflations, but I do not attribute the persistence in inflation to a lack of Fed credibility. Indeed, there is evidence in support of central bank credibility, including thatlong-term inflation expectationsare not far from the FOMC's 2 percent target. Let meconcludewith a summary of my takeaways. History is useful, but it can only tell us so much, particularly in situations without historical precedent. The current situation is different from past episodes in at least four ways. First, the pandemic created unprecedented disruptions to global supply chains. Second, the pandemic is having a long-lasting effect on labor force participation rates. Third, the credibility of the central bank is higher now than it was in the 1960s and 1970s. Fourth and most importantly, unlike in the late 1960s and 1970s, the Federal Reserve is addressing the outbreak in inflation promptly and forcefully to maintain that credibility and to preserve the "well anchored" property of long-term inflation expectations. Finally, economic models are important tools but need to be used with careful interpretation and judgment when history does not speak to the current situation. Sound decisionmaking requires that their findings be complemented with additional analytical tools, including careful scrutiny of real-time data. Thank you! ReferencesBall, Laurence (1994). "What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?" in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed.,Monetary Policy.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 155–93. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2023). "Managing Disinflations," paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. Kohn, Donald (2008). "Lessons for Central Bankers from a Phillips Curve Framework," remarks given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 53rd Annual Economic Conference, Chatham, Mass., June 11. Macklem, Tiff (2022). "Opening Statement before the Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and the Economy," Ottawa, Ontario, November 1. Powell, Jerome H. (2022a). "Nomination Hearing," testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S Senate, Washington, January 11. ——— (2022b). "Monetary Policy and Price Stability," speech delivered at "Reassessing Constraints on the Economy and Policy," an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. Sims, Christopher, and Tao Zha (2006). "Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?"American Economic Review,vol. 96 (March), pp. 54–81. Tetlow, Robert J. (2022). "How Large Is the Output Cost of Disinflation?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-078. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. 1. They draw this conclusion by replicating some of the methodology from the literature on sacrifice ratios. See, for example, Ball (1994) and Tetlow (2022) and references therein.Return to text 2. For example, Chair Powell, in testimony before the U.S. Senate, said, "We will use our tools to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched" (Powell, 2022a). This reasoning has a lengthy history, as evidenced by remarks in 2008 by then Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Donald Kohn: "As demonstrated by historical experiences around the world and in the United States during the 1970s and 1980s, efforts to bring inflation and inflation expectations back to desirable levels after they have risen appreciably involve costly and undesirable changes in resource utilization" (Kohn, 2008). And the sentiment is shared internationally, as remarks by Bank of Canada Governor Tiff Macklem attest: "If we don't do enough [policy tightening], Canadians will continue to endure the hardship of high inflation. And they will come to expect persistently high inflation, which will require much higher interest rates and, potentially, a severe recession to control inflation. Nobody wants that" (Macklem, 2022).Return to text 3. Converting the unemployment sacrifice ratio in Ball (1994) into output space using an Okun coefficient of two renders an output sacrifice ratio of just 1.8, a small number by historical standards. For a summary of sacrifice ratios in history, see Tetlow (2022) and Cecchetti and others (2023).Return to text 4. This may be related to the authors' second conjecture on why initially high levels of inflation are associated with lower sacrifice ratios—namely, that high inflation is associated with large global supply shocks (Cecchetti and others, 2023, p. 18). It is analytically distinct, however, in that they do not emphasize the timely monetary policy response to those shocks.Return to text 5. This point is elaborated upon in Chair Powell's 2022 Jackson Hole speech; see Powell (2022b).Return to text 6. The borderline, as it were, between the inflationary era that the authors argue is critical for obtaining plausible results in their conditional forecasting exercise and the Great Moderation period is the Volcker disinflation of 1981–82. Sims and Zha (2006) argue that the Volcker disinflation is the only regime shift that can be unequivocally shown to be present in the data over the postwar period in their sample.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that Joshua Gallin has been appointed secretary of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), succeeding James Clouse, effective immediately. As FOMC secretary, Gallin will advise the Committee on policy matters, and oversee the production of the Committee's minutes, transcripts, and associated communications. Clouse will continue to serve as deputy director of the Monetary Affairs division. Gallin began his career at the Board in 1998. He has served as special advisor to Chair Jerome H. Powell since 2019 and as senior associate director of the Board's Division of Research and Statistics since 2016. He holds a B.A. in economics from Carleton College and a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Chicago. "Josh has been a trusted adviser to me, offering keen insights and careful analysis on a wide range of issues," said Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome Powell. "He brings those same talents, as well as extensive knowledge and experience related to monetary policy and the economy, to this new role." Clouse was appointed FOMC secretary in November 2017. He began his career at the Board in 1989 and has been deputy director of the Monetary Affairs division since 2007. He holds a B.A. in economics from Princeton University and a Ph.D. in economics from Northwestern University. "I am exceedingly grateful for Jim's service to the FOMC," said Chair Powell. "He has contributed to every part of the Committee's work these past five years, especially in helping manage its first public review of the monetary policy framework, and in helping the Committee respond with speed and creativity to the global pandemic. His continued service will be a great benefit to our public mission," said Chair Powell. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced four new members of its Community Advisory Council (CAC). The CAC is composed of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer, workforce, and community development organizations and interests. CAC members provide information, advice, and recommendations to the Board on relevant policy matters and emerging issues of interest. The four new members of the CAC were selected from a pool of individuals who applied to the Board's public call for applications. These members will replace: former Chair Tawney Brunsch, Dr. Susan Bradbury, Stephanie Mackay, and Lora Smith who all departed at the end of 2022. Each new member will serve a three-year term. The new members of the CAC are: Carlos J. Contreras IIIPresident & CEO, Goodwill Industries of San AntonioSan Antonio, Texas Fearn GuptonRural Development ManagerSouth Carolina Department of CommerceColumbia, S.C. Michelle Ka'uhaneSenior Vice President & Chief Impact OfficerHawaii Community FoundationHonolulu, Hawaii Megan LangleyExecutive DirectorStrengthen North DakotaSouris, N.D. These individuals will join eleven existing members and will be led by incoming Chair Daniel Betancourt and incoming Vice Chair Christie McCravy. The Council is scheduled to meet May 18 and October 19, 2023. Records of previous meetings may be foundhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it has denied the request by Custodia Bank, Inc., of Cheyenne, Wyoming, for reconsideration of theBoard’s decision last monthon its application to be supervised by the Federal Reserve. The Board previously concluded that the firm’s application as submitted was inconsistent with the required factors under the law. The Board’s rules permit an applicant to request that the Board reconsider its application decision. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Riverbend Financial Corporation, Fort Worth, TexasWritten Agreement dated February 14, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released the hypothetical scenarios for its annual stress test, which helps ensure that large banks are able to lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. This year, 23 banks will be tested against a severe global recession with heightened stress in both commercial and residential real estate markets, as well as in corporate debt markets. The Board's stress test evaluates the resilience of large banks by estimating losses, net revenue, and capital levels—which provide a cushion against losses—under hypothetical recession scenarios that extend two years into the future. The scenarios are not forecasts and should not be interpreted as predictions of future economic conditions. In the 2023 stress test scenario, the U.S. unemployment rate rises nearly 6-1/2 percentage points, to a peak of 10 percent. The increase in the unemployment rate is accompanied by severe market volatility, a significant widening of corporate bond spreads, and a collapse in asset prices. In addition to the hypothetical scenario, banks with large trading operations will be tested against a global market shock component that primarily stresses their trading positions. The global market shock component is a set of hypothetical shocks to a large set of risk factors reflecting market distress and heightened uncertainty. For the first time, this year's stress test will feature an additional exploratory market shock to the trading books of the largest and most complex banks, with firm-specific results released. This exploratory market shock will not contribute to the capital requirements set by this year's stress test and will be used to expand the Board's understanding of the largest banks' resilience by considering more than a single hypothetical stress event. The Board also will use the results of the exploratory market shock to assess the potential of multiple scenarios to capture a wider array of risks in future stress test exercises. The table below shows the components of the test that apply to each bank, based on data as of the third quarter of 2022. Table 1 in the scenario document has additional information. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. 2023 Stress Test Scenarios (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, Orlando, Florida I would like to thank the American Bankers Association for the invitation to speak to you today. It is a pleasure to be with you and to have the opportunity to share some of my views on banking regulation and supervision. Of course, as you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recently held its first meeting of the year. So, before getting into the substance of my remarks, I'll provide some brief thoughts on the economic outlook and monetary policy.1 Monetary PolicyLet me begin with the FOMC's effort to lower inflation, which continues to be much too high. Stable prices are necessary for a healthy economy and to support a labor market that works for everyone. As a member of the FOMC, I remain focused on bringing inflation down to our 2 percent goal. Over the past year, the Committee has taken forceful actions to address unacceptably high inflation by significantly raising the federal funds rate and reducing our balance sheet holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities. At our most recent meeting, we continued on that path by further increasing the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent. I expect that ongoing increases will be appropriate to bring the federal funds rate to a sufficiently restrictive level and that it will need to remain there for some time to restore price stability. The economic outlook and the outlook for inflation continue to be highly uncertain. Global and domestic factors are contributing to heightened uncertainty, and I expect that we will continue to be surprised by economic and geopolitical developments and by the incoming data. While we have seen modestly lower inflation readings in recent months, overall inflation remains high. Measures of core services inflation have been persistently elevated, and labor demand exceeds the supply of available workers, which is leading employers to increase wages in an effort to retain and attract workers. The ongoing tightness in the labor market puts upward pressure on inflation, even if some components of inflation moderate due to improvements in supply-side factors. The longer high inflation persists, the more likely it is that households and businesses may come to expect higher inflation in the longer term. Should that be the case, the FOMC's job of lowering inflation would be even more challenging. Given the highly uncertain environment, my views on the future path of monetary policy will continue to be informed by the incoming data and its implications for the outlook. I will continue to look for consistent evidence that inflation remains on a downward path when considering further rate increases and at what point we will have achieved a sufficiently restrictive stance for the policy rate. We are still far from achieving price stability, and I expect that it will be necessary to further tighten monetary policy to bring inflation down toward our goal. Doing so will likely lead to subdued growth in economic activity and some softening in labor market conditions. While there are costs and risks to tightening monetary policy to lower inflation, I see the costs and risks of allowing inflation to persist as far greater. Restoring price stability is essential to support a sustainably strong labor market. Turning to the focus of my remarks today, I would like to share my thoughts on several current aspects of banking supervision and regulation. What I say next will certainly not surprise you: I expect there will be meaningful changes in regulations, guidance, and supervisory expectations over the coming year. While some of these changes will affect only the largest institutions, many will affect community bankers like you and may impact your work to support your local communities. To be clear, the issues facing the banking industry continue to evolve over time, and the regulatory response to these changes must adapt as well. But as we continue to review and revisit the regulatory framework, I'd like to share a few thoughts about how the Federal Reserve can best fulfill its missions of furthering the safety and soundness of banks and promoting the stability of the financial system. Specifically, I will discuss three topics that are more interconnected than they may appear: (1) Federal Reserve independence, (2) predictability in applications, and (3) tailoring of regulations and supervision. Federal Reserve IndependenceMost often, the independence of the Federal Reserve is discussed in terms of independence in the setting of monetary policy. While the value of independent decision making in monetary policy is vital, and research shows that it leads to better policy outcomes in the long run, it is also important to emphasize the value of independence in banking supervision and regulation. You may have seen Chair Powell's recent speech on this topic, in which he noted that independence in our bank regulatory function helps to ensure that our decisions are driven primarily by the goals of promoting a safe and sound financial system and safeguarding the stability of the U.S. financial system stability.2In this context, independence also means that we are not influenced by political considerations in making policy decisions. The Federal Reserve's independence in bank regulation also provides stability and consistency to regulated institutions. I am not suggesting that bank regulation remain static in the face of change. To the contrary, the Federal Reserve's regulatory approach must be capable of addressing and adapting to new activities and new risks but also must be constantly directed towards furthering our statutory objectives. Of course, this independence in bank regulation must be accompanied by accountability, to both Congress and the American public. Existing law provides a number of mechanisms to ensure this accountability to Congress. First, members of the Board of Governors are appointed by the President, subject to the advice and consent of the Senate. Second, the Board also regularly communicates with Congress, both through in-person testimony to relevant banking and financial services committees and by providing regular reports on key areas within the Federal Reserve's areas of responsibility, including semiannual reports on banking applications activity, supervision and regulation, cybersecurity and financial system resilience, and financial stability. This regular cadence of testimony and public reporting provides visibility into the inner working of the Federal Reserve, not just for Congress, but also for the public. Beyond these measures though, accountability also means having transparent policies and procedures and conducting supervision in a way that is predictable and fair. Transparency builds legitimacy and helps demonstrate that the Fed is executing its responsibilities in a fair way for all regulated institutions. One area I think we are always looking to improve is the publication of clear, appropriate guidance, especially for community banks. I think there are examples where we have done a pretty good job, for instance providing tools to help community banks estimate their losses under the Current Expected Credit Loss, or CECL, accounting standard. We owe this duty of transparency to all regulated institutions. For example, I expect the Board will soon publish the supervision criteria implemented by the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee—the LISCC manual. Banks should have some assurance that they are being held to the same standards as their peers over time. While publication of the manual may be only a modest improvement in transparency, I think it will be an important step. Transparency helps us not only with accountability, but also with building legitimacy and public trust. To be clear, I do not consider transparency to mean leniency. We hold banks of all sizes to high standards, commensurate with their size and risk, and being transparent does not dilute the rigor of our regulatory standards. Transparency helps ensure that banks are aware of these standards and expectations so that they can work more effectively and efficiently to meet them. Perhaps most importantly, though, we must implement the laws that Congress has passed as they are written and not stretch that authority to venture into other areas of policymaking. For example, consider the distinction between (1) making sure institutions are managing all of their material risks and (2) instructing banks to make certain credit allocation decisions, that is, telling banks to make or not make loans to certain industries. The first objective—making sure financial institutions manage their material risks—is one of the central functions of a bank supervisor, and is fundamental to safety and soundness. But it is equally clear that the second objective—influencing a bank to make certain credit allocation decisions—is not the role of a banking regulator. If you look across the regulated banking sectors, you will find that each bank makes different credit decisions, reacting not only to market demand and economic conditions, but also implementing the bank's strategy. And to be clear, I share the widely held view that the appropriate role of the Federal Reserve is not to make credit allocation decisions for banks. The Fed's role as a banking supervisor is not to replace a bank's management and board of directors in adopting a banking strategy and risk appetite. Instead, it is to apply appropriate, targeted regulation and supervision, in order to be able to assess that when a bank engages in an activity, it does so in compliance with applicable laws and in a safe and sound manner. This can be a difficult balance to strike but it is something I believe we must always bear in mind whenever the Fed uses or proposes using its regulatory or supervisory tools. Banking regulation and supervision should not be the place to implement new policies that are not mandated by Congress. In the past, I have shared my views about the Fed's rulemaking agenda, which remain the same today. I continue to support changes based on our experience applying existing rules or prompted by new and emerging issues. However, any incremental changes to regulation should yield significant improvements to safety and soundness at reasonable cost, in consideration of the tradeoffs between cost and safety. And of course, any changes should be to further our regulatory responsibilities as mandated by Congress. I'll turn now to a few examples of "how" the Federal Reserve should regulate and supervise financial institutions in the context of merger applications and in the tailoring of our regulations and supervision. Predictability in Reviewing Bank MergersRecently, there has been significant attention focused on the role of federal bank regulators in reviewing merger applications, with scrutiny of not only the rigor of the review, but also on how the review process impacts the merger applicants. I certainly welcome this discussion and hearing public feedback, to see if the process can be improved. Congress established the factors that must be considered when the Federal Reserve and other regulators review bank applications. These include the competitive effects of the proposed merger, financial and managerial resources, future prospects of the merged institutions, convenience and needs of the communities to be served, compliance with money laundering laws, and the effect of the transaction on the stability of the financial system. Although the review framework is the same for all applications, the facts of each case can vary widely, from community bank mergers to mergers of much larger institutions that can affect markets across large regions of the country. While this variability necessitates an in-depth review of each transaction on its own merits, these reviews are most effective when the expectations of the regulators are clear in advance and the parties can reasonably anticipate the application review process. The agencies are required to review the statutory factors, but it is also important that we understand that timing matters in merger transactions. There are significant consequences to firms when applications are not acted on in a timely manner, including increased operational risk, the additional expense associated with running two institutions in parallel over a longer period of time, employee retention issues, and perceived reputational risk. Congress has also recognized the need for prompt action, imposing a variety of time limits for agency action on bank applications.3Recently, we have seen an increase in average processing times in the merger review process.4I am concerned about delays in the applications process and am concerned that the increase in average processing times will become the new normal. I think it's helpful to consider the source of delays in processing applications and consider whether there are opportunities for improvement. This is another area where increased transparency can help. The legal standards we apply have not changed, and yet the review of applications can be affected by incomplete or inaccurate information or information that does not meet the expectations for an approvable transaction. Filling this information gap with clearer guidance, and making sure applicants understand our expectations could meaningfully improve the process. New supervisory information that comes to light during the examination process can also lead to delays, particularly if new supervisory issues need to be remediated before the application can be approved. In these cases, transparency between the regulator and the applicant helps ensure clear expectations about potential delays. That being said, improved transparency only goes so far. I think it will come as no surprise to the bankers here today that often, the key difference in processing times is whether the application will be acted on by the Reserve Banks on a delegated basis or will require Board action. While an application can come to the Board for many reasons, the most common reason is that the Board has received a protest on the application from a member of the public. I think it is helpful to consider whether this process could be improved, so that bona fide concerns raised by the public are appropriately considered, while still ensuring timely decision-making. Finally, to reiterate a point I've made in the past, I continue to believe that the application process should not be used as a substitute for rulemaking. If the rules applicable to a firm or group of firms needs to be updated, we should follow the rulemaking process to update those rules. TailoringFinally, I would like to emphasize the role of tailoring in regulation and supervision. Tailoring was a core feature of the response to the 2008 financial crisis and since then has been the subject of a concerted effort to refine and improve the regulatory and supervisory framework based on experience since the framework was implemented.5Tailoring has proven to be an effective and efficient way to regulate and supervise banks of all sizes. Of course, all of you here today are very familiar with risk-based supervision, which is itself a form of tailoring, focusing supervisory attention on areas that pose the greatest risks. But tailoring also helps us adopt meaningful differences in regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations, depending on the size and complexity of the regulated institution, from the largest G-SIBs to the smallest community banks. This tailored approach manifests itself across the spectrum from the stringency of capital requirements, the regulatory reporting obligations, and the frequency of examination, among many others. Time has demonstrated the virtues of this tailored approach. The U.S. banking system entered the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic with high levels of capital and liquidity, and banks of all sizes supported the economy during the darkest days of the pandemic and have continued to support the economy ever since. This tailored approach should continue to feature prominently in upcoming proposed revisions to the capital framework. While I expect the Board will propose new capital requirements for the largest institutions, including the Basel III "endgame" reforms, I do not expect every tier of firms to be subject to the same changes. And my understanding is that there are no plans to propose changes to the community bank capital framework as part of this capital review. This tailored approach is sensible not only by matching regulation to risk, but it is embedded in the statutory framework. For example, the bipartisan Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act included several elements designed to tailor regulatory requirements. For the largest firms, this law instructs the Board to tailor its "enhanced prudential standards" framework—the strictest standards—to firms based on the risks they pose. This statute also reduced the burden on smaller institutions, including through the community bank leverage ratio, the creation of short-form call reports for smaller community banks and a longer examination cycle for small, well-capitalized banks. In my view, the current community bank capital requirements, including the community bank leverage ratio, are functioning well. In practice, tailoring requires a framework that both distinguishes firms by size, risk, and complexity, and imposes appropriate regulatory requirements in light of these differences. The largest institutions are classified by a number of factors including size, cross-jurisdictional activity, reliance on short-term wholesale funding, off-balance sheet exposures, and nonbank assets. These factors, and the G-SIB scoring methodology more broadly, help contrast the largest firms that pose the greatest risks with the smaller and less systemic firms. This translates into a regulatory regime where the G-SIBs are subject to the most stringent standards, incorporating enhancements like a GSIB-specific risk-based capital surcharge and the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio. Even the smallest banks are subject to size and risk considerations in their supervisory expectations, like a longer examination cycle, and straight forward capital and liquidity requirements and expectations. This very intentional approach accomplishes utility and efficiency, for both regulators and the regulated institutions, that would be otherwise impossible. Tailoring our regulatory approach enables us to strike an appropriate balance for each relevant bank tier, with requirements that address risks, including financial stability risks, while recognizing the costs of over-regulation. ClosingWe have a dynamic financial system in the United States, a system that has long been supported by having independent and accountable regulators. As the financial system has evolved over time, so has the regulatory and supervisory framework designed to further the goals of safety and soundness, and financial stability. In my view, it is important that we continue to emphasize the value of accountability and transparency, while continuing to improve the fairness and efficiency of this framework. 1. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Chair Jerome Powell,"Panel on Central Bank Independence and the Mandate—Evolving Views" (PDF)(speech at the Symposium on Central Bank Independence, Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm, Sweden, January 10, 2023).Return to text 3.See, e.g.,12 U.S.C. 1842(b)(1); 4807(a).Return to text 4.SeeBanking Applications Activity Semiannual Report (PDF), January 1-June 30, 2022, Vol. 9, No. 2, Table 1, "Dispositions and processing times of proposals, 2018-2021 and 2021:H1 and 2022:H1" (December 2022).Return to text 5. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018); Chris Dodd and Barney Frank,interview by David Brancaccio,Marketplace, September 12, 2018; Daniel K. Tarullo,"Departing Thoughts"(speech at the Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton, NJ, April 4, 2017); Randal K. Quarles, "Between the Hither and the Farther Shore: Thoughts on Unfinished Business"(speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, December 2, 2021).Return to text
Lael Brainard submitted her resignation February 14, 2023 as Vice Chair and a member of the Federal Reserve Board, effective on or around February 20, 2023. She has been a member of the Board since June 16, 2014, and Vice Chair of the Board since May 23, 2022. "Lael has brought formidable talent and superb results to everything she has done at the Federal Reserve," Chair Jerome H. Powell said. "That lengthy list includes her thought leadership on monetary policy and economic research, her stewardship of financial stability and the payments system, strengthening the financial system both domestically and globally, and helping to manage the immense operational agency challenges during the pandemic. My colleagues and I will truly miss her." Dr. Brainard was nominated to the Board by President Obama and then re-nominated as Vice Chair by President Biden. During her time at the Board, she chaired multiple committees, including the Committee on Financial Stability, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the Committee on Payments, Clearing, and Settlement, and the Committee on Board Affairs, among others. She also served as chair of the Federal Open Market Committee's communication subcommittee. Dr. Brainard played a vital role during the response to the pandemic and has provided wise counsel on monetary policy, as well as contributing to the creation of the Fed Listens initiative. The Board published its first financial stability report under her leadership. She has led the interagency process to strengthen the Community Reinvestment Act, as well as the Board's work to establish the FedNow real-time payments network. Dr. Brainard has represented the Board internationally, including at the Bank for International Settlements, the Group of Seven, and the Financial Stability Board. While at the Fed, Dr. Brainard was chair of the Financial Stability Board's Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities and also chair of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Working Party 3 committee. She will soon start as director of the National Economic Council, which advises the president on domestic and global economic policy. Before her time at the Fed, she served as Under Secretary of the U.S. Department of the Treasury and counselor to the Secretary of the Treasury, where she received the Alexander Hamilton Award. Prior to that, Dr. Brainard was vice president and the founding director of the Global Economy and Development Program at the Brookings Institution. Before that, she served as the Deputy National Economic Adviser and Deputy Assistant to the President and G-7 Sherpa. From 1990 to 1996, Dr. Brainard was assistant and associate professor of applied economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of Management. Dr. Brainard received a B.A. with university honors from Wesleyan University and an M.S. and a Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University, where she was awarded a National Science Foundation Fellowship. She is also the recipient of the Harvard Centennial Medal and the White House Fellowship. For media inquiries, please e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from January 23 and February 1, 2023. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee on Wednesday released the attached minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 31–February 1, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision and subsequently are published in the Board’s Annual Report. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. FOMC minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website athttp://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 31–February 1, 2023:HTML|PDF
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the Ec10, Principles of Economics, Lecture, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts Thank you, Jason, for inviting me to join your economics class and for your kind introduction. It is a pleasure to be here. I miss teaching economics classes. Before I continue, I would like to note, as I always do, that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC). What I like about economics is that it deals with real-world issues, and many times we experience firsthand a topic discussed in textbooks. Take the recent inflation, for example. This may be your first experience with high inflation. I am sure you noticed prices going up at restaurants, supermarkets, and the gas pump without having to read about it in the newspaper. I, for one, can confirm that the inflationary pressure in the rental housing market in the Washington, D.C., area is real. While we have all experienced prices going up, it's challenging to measure inflation itself and its consequences. Today,I want to do the following: discuss with you different ways to measure inflation, characterize our recent inflation, and contextualize the battle against inflation in terms of the Fed's dual-mandate goals of price stability and maximum employment. Then, I will offer some concluding remarks. Different Ways to Measure InflationThe two primary measures of the price levelin the United States are the consumer price index, commonly referred to as the CPI, and the personal consumption expenditures price index, commonly referred to as the PCE price index. Positive changes in these indexes are recorded as inflation. Each inflation measure has both total (or headline) and core subindexes, which I will talk about later. The CPI and PCE price indexes are constructed in broadly similar ways, but there are important differences between them.1Both indexes measure inflation using a specific basket of goods and services consumed by households. These baskets are similar but not identical across the two measures. Both measures also weight each item in their basket roughly in accordance with its expenditure share. That is, the more households spend on an item, like rent, the higher the weight it receives in the overall index. The weights are broadly similar across the two indexes, but, again, there are some important differences. Now, let's talk in more detail about thedifferences between the CPI and the PCE price indexes. First, the PCE price index has abroader scopethan the CPI. The CPI is limited to expenditures that households pay out of pocket, while the PCE price index covers a broader set of goods and services as it seeks to cover prices for all consumer expenditures in the national income and product accounts (NIPA). For example, the PCE price index includes prices of the health services provided to households through Medicaid, while the CPI excludes these items. Second, the PCE price index and the CPI usedifferent weightingsystems. The PCE price index, which is more comprehensive than the CPI, estimates expenditure shares using the national income and product accounts, while the CPI measures expenditure shares using a separate survey of households, the Consumer Expenditure Survey. This leads to some differences in expenditure weights that can at times be important. For example, the share of medical services is notably higher in the PCE price index (partly because the PCE price index includes more kinds of medical expenditures), and the share of housing services is noticeably smaller (because overall expenditures are larger in the PCE price index). As a result, when health-care services or housing services inflation behave differently than other prices, this can lead to differences in PCE versus CPI inflation. Another difference in the weights is that the PCE price index uses time-varying weights, while the official CPI keeps weights fixed for a year. The PCE price index weights change to reflect changes in the goods consumers buy. For instance, at the start of the pandemic, the CPI was still giving the same weights to cruise ship and airline fares, even though no one was traveling. The time-varying weights in PCE also account forsubstitutionbehavior. Suppose the price of apples goes up and the price of oranges stays the same. Consumers are then likely to substitute apples with oranges. In contrast, the CPI does not capture substitution behavior because the basket of goods consumers purchase is updated only once a year (instead of every month) and reflects expenditure patterns prevailing two years ago. The substitution effects captured by the PCE price index is one reason why PCE inflation (black line) is, almost always, lower than CPI inflation (red line), as you can see infigure 1. As I mentioned earlier, there are both total and core PCE price and CPI indexes. The core subindex is the total index excluding food and energy prices.2Food and energy prices are more volatile than other prices, which makes total inflation more volatile. This volatility is evident infigure 2. You can see the black line (total PCE price index) exhibiting more drastic ups and downs than core PCE price index, the red line in the graph, and many of the sharp movements are short lived. In other words, the volatility in the total PCE price index makes it harder to discern trends (longer-lasting movements) from transitory movements. In addition, food and energy prices often depend on factors that are beyond the influence of monetary policy, such as geopolitical developments (for example, those associated with fluctuations in energy prices) or weather or disease or war (for example, in the case of food prices). In summary, the differences between CPI and PCE price indexes are important. The FOMC has chosen to target the PCE price index because it is broader and it captures more accurately what households are actually consuming.3In addition, food and energy account for a significant portion of household budgets, so the Federal Reserve's inflation objective is defined in terms of the total PCE price index, but the Fed monitors the core PCE price index, as well as other inflation indicators, in order to identify evolving inflation trends.4 Select Components of Core PCE InflationNow, I would like to dig a bit deeper into recent inflation trends. To do so, I find it useful to look at three large categories that together make up the core PCE price index: goods excluding food and energy, housing services, and services excluding housing and energy.Slide 7provides some examples of what is in each subcomponent. Figure 3shows recent inflation rates for each component: goods excluding food and energy (black line), housing services (blue line), and services excluding housing and energy (red line). I look at these three categories separately because what has been causing inflation in each of these sectors is somewhat different. Understanding the different causes and how they affect the different components could help the FOMC predict the future course of inflation. Since monetary policy affects the economy (and inflation) with a lag, the Committee is always forward looking. Focusing on the price of core goods, the black line in figure 3, you can see how goods prices rose sharply in the second half of 2020 due to both a rapid shift in demand toward goods and unprecedented disruptions to global supply chains. As so many were isolating themselves—especially those of us lucky enough to have jobs that let us work remotely—there was a sharp shift in demand from services (eating out and traveling) to durable goods (like stationary bicycles) to make our stay-at-home experience more pleasant. The pandemic also severely disrupted the global production and distribution of goods, leading to large backlogs at ports and widespread shortages of materials, most notably semiconductors. The imbalance between supply and demand for goods resulted in a sharp increase of prices. At the end of 2021, once vaccines were developed and deployed and people slowly emerged from isolation, there was a partial shift in demand back to services, and supply chain bottlenecks started to ease. Thus, inflation in this category started to come down and has come down substantially. In contrast to core goods, housing services inflation, the blue dashed line in figure 3, has not started to come down yet. Housing services prices are estimated using information on rents and measure the price that renters pay, and homeowners would pay, to live in their homes. Like core goods, demand in the housing sector underwent a major shift during the pandemic. The surge in work from home shown infigure 4led to an increase in the demand for bigger homes located in smaller metro areas or further from city centers. These shifts in demand happened much more rapidly than the response in housing supply. As a result, rents increased quite significantly. We have not seen a decline in housing services inflation, but there are indications that we soon will. To see this, considerfigure 5. Because rental agreements tend to be renewed infrequently (often only once a year), average rents (the black line), which is what the PCE price index measures, tend to lag market rents (the green, blue, and red lines), the rent I would pay if I were to sign a new lease as a new tenant. For this reason, market rents are a leading indicator of how overall rents and housing services prices are likely to change over the next 6 to 12 months. Market rents are now increasing much more slowly than over 2021 and much of 2022, suggesting that housing services inflation will eventually slow. Lastly, inflation in other core services, the red line back in figure 3, is a large category that covers activities as varied as travel and recreation, and medical and legal services. Inflation for these services has remained stubbornly high. As other Governors and I have noted in the past, an important source of inflation pressures in this category has likely been the shortage of workers, which has pushed up labor costs at rates above those consistent with 2 percent inflation. The inflation outlook for this nonhousing category of core services partly depends on whether growth in nominal labor costs comes back down, and recent data suggest that labor compensation has indeed started to decelerate somewhat over the past year. Although I have focused on core inflation because it is more useful for assessing trends in inflation, we also closely follow food and energy prices given that our target is for total inflation and that food and energy prices are very important for many households. Both food and energy inflation rose sharply following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. But more recently, food inflation has slowed somewhat, as global food prices have retraced some of their earlier increases, while energy prices have fallen noticeably. Because energy prices are shaped primarily by global developments and not by U.S. monetary policy, there is a lot of uncertainty about the future course of energy inflation. In summary, core goods inflation has started to come down. Several indicators suggest that housing services inflation is likely to come down in the coming months. There is more uncertainty surrounding inflation in core services excluding housing. Over time, we'll learn more about inflation dynamics in this sector. Benefits of Price Stability and a Target of 2 PercentSo far, I've talked about how to measure inflation, about different subcomponents, and about drivers of inflation. I will now discuss thebenefits of price stabilityand a longer-run 2 percent inflation rate target. Price stability is one of two goals assigned to the Federal Reserve by law, but there is also a broad consensus among economic researchers and policymakers that price stability is a desirable objective. Deviations from price stability in the form of persistently elevated inflation rates are costly for the economy for several reasons, some of which I'll review now.5 Fundamentally, a low and stable inflation rate is beneficial for the decisionmaking processes of households and firms. Choices regarding work, savings, and the expansion of business enterprises are likely to be harder when there is uncertainty about the likely future course of prices. Retirement planning by households and investment decisions by firms are, consequently, put on a sounder footing if there is confidence about the future value of the currency. The avoidance of this uncertainty is also likely to be beneficial for national economic performance. If the prospect of high inflation or uncertainty about future inflation factors heavily into firms' and households' calculations, it is less likely that resources will be allocated to activities that raise the productive potential of the economy, rather than into areas that are only made attractive by the presence of high and variable inflation.6 There are other economiccosts of high inflation. In the labor market, as nominal wages are often set in advance, bouts of unanticipated inflation typically lead to a drop in workers' real wages in the short run, and this is a burden on households in meeting their expenses.7 More generally, even anticipated rates of inflation can produce redistributions of income. Such redistributions are also likely to be adverse for members of society who do not have ready access to the kinds of financial instruments that would best protect them against high inflation. The likelihood of wide-ranging distortions due to inflation is enhanced by the fact that the U.S. tax code does not fully take inflation into account. Consequently, as stressed in fundamental work by the late Martin Feldstein of Harvard University, high inflation can distort saving and investment decisions, including through the treatment of after-tax capital gains.8 Another reason why deviations from price stability distort decisions and redistribute income lies in the fact that much of our financial system, including many arrangements pertaining to retirement plans, is structured in terms of streams of nominal payments.9Absent a background of a steady and predictable inflation rate, the purchasing power of retirement income streams and other payments may turn out to be very different from what was envisioned when they were originally arranged. The fact that much of the financial system is based on nominal payments also makes it clear that unexpectedly or undulylow inflation rates have important economic costs, too, including by saddling borrowers (debtors) with very high repayment burdens in real terms. Consider homeowners who take out a conventional fixed-rate mortgage, with the expectation their nominal incomes will rise about 2 percent per year. If the economy were instead to experience deflation accompanied by flat or declining wages, then after a few years the homeowners might find it considerably more difficult to cover their monthly fixed mortgage payments than they had originally anticipated. This increase in the real value of debts due to very low inflation or, worse, outright deflation would also be a burden on all households that have outstanding fixed nominal student loans, auto loans, or credit card debt, as well as businesses that had taken out bank loans or issued bonds. In 2012, the FOMC set a formal inflation target to help households and businesses understand our goal and help keep inflation expectations anchored over time. The FOMC's choice of a 2 percent inflation rate, instead of zero, reflected the judgment that reasonable price stability was desirable while also recognizing the reality that very low inflation can also be economically costly.10In addition, a zero percent goal would make the longer-run nominal interest rate 2 percentage points lower than would be the case under a 2 percent inflation goal. A zero-inflation environment would consequently restrict the FOMC's scope to lower nominal interest rates when this was necessary for stabilization purposes. In contrast, a 2 percent inflation rate is still low enough to be consistent with price stability but gives the FOMC greater scope to stimulate the economy in times when it judges that achievement of maximum employment requires that the Committee provide policy accommodation. From these considerations flows the conclusion that a 2 percent inflation rate is the price-stability objective most consistent with the FOMC's dual mandate. The 2 percent longer-run inflation goal has been maintained since 2012. Policy Risksand the Benefits of Credibility Often, the FOMC must balance competing risks given its dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and stable prices. In the current context, there is, on the one hand, the risk that monetary policy will not be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation back to 2 percent over time, and on the other hand there is a risk of policy being too restrictive and unnecessarily increasing the likelihood of recession. In the face of this latter risk, some economists argue that a higher inflation target is better than the Fed's current 2 percent target rate.11Changing the FOMC's longer-run inflationobjective, however, would introduce an additional risk by calling into question the FOMC's commitment to stabilizing inflation at any level because it might lead people to suspect that the target could be changed opportunistically in the future. If so, then these reputational costs will undermine the key benefits of well-anchored longer-run inflation expectations discussed above: an increased ability of monetary policy to fight economic downturns without sacrificing price stability. Moreover, if the purpose of a higher inflation target is to increase the ability of the central bank to deal with the severe recessions that follow financial crises, then a better strategic approach might be to rely on more vigorous supervisory and macroprudential policies that could help reduce the likelihood of such events. Further, seeking an inflation rate in the vicinity of 4 percent or higher would certainly stretch the meaning of "stable prices" in the Federal Reserve Act.12 ConclusionInconclusion, today, I have discussed with you how persistently high inflation hurts everyone and how the Fed must jointly achieve price stability and maximum employment to fulfill its dual mandate over time. I also discussed how persistently low inflation is costly, and how changing the 2 percent inflation target would damage the central bank's credibility. For these reasons, I am committed to lowering inflation to our 2 percent target. This is a very exciting time to study economics. I hope that the ways of thinking you are developing in this class will help you better understand economic phenomena that you observe and the challenges that policymakers face. Thank you. ReferencesBall, Laurence (2013). "The Case for Four Percent Inflation," Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey,Central Bank Review,vol. 13 (May), pp. 17–31. Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk (2014). "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Wages,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 6 (January), pp. 70–101. Bernanke, Ben (2010a). "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 27. ——— (2010b). "Statement of the Honorable Ben Bernanke, Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System," inThe Economic Outlook, hearing before the Joint Economic Committee,U.S. Congress, April 14, Senate Hearing 111-583, 111 Cong. Washington: Government Printing Office. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro (2010). "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy (PDF)," IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03. Washington: International Monetary Fund, February 12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000).Monetary Policy Report(PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, February. ——— (2016). "What Is Inflation and How Does the Federal Reserve Evaluate Changes in the Rate of Inflation?" webpage. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John Williams (2012). "Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?"Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,vol. 44, Supplement 1 (February), pp. 47–82. Diercks, Anthony M. (2019). "The Reader's Guide to Optimal Monetary Policy," paper, August 17. Feldstein, Martin (1982). "Inflation, Capital Taxation, and Monetary Policy," in Robert E. Hall, ed.,Inflation:Causes and Effects.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 153-67. ———, ed. (1999).The Costs and Benefits of Price Stability.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Fischer, Stanley (1981). "Towards an Understanding of the Costs of Inflation: II,"Carnegie- Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 15 (1), pp. 5-41. Fischer, Stanley, and Franco Modigliani (1978). "Towards an Understanding of the Real Effects and Costs of Inflation,"Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv,vol. 114 (4), pp. 810-33. Johnson, Noah (2017). "A Comparison of PCE and CPI: Methodological Differences in U.S. Inflation Calculation and Their Implications (PDF)," BLS Statistical Survey Paper. Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics, November. McCallum, Bennett T. (1990). "Inflation: Theory and Evidence," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank H. Hahn, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 2.Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 963–1012. Mitchell, Wesley C. (1913).Business Cycles.University of California Berkeley Press Part III. Nelson, Edward (2021). "The Emergence of Forward Guidance as a Monetary Policy Tool," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-033. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Orphanides, Athanasios (2006). "The Road to Price Stability,"American Economic Review,vol. 96 (May), pp. 178-81. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. Shiller, Robert J. (1997). "Why Do People Dislike Inflation?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: MotivationandStrategy.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13-65. Summers, Lawrence (1991). "Panel Discussion: Price Stability. How Should Long-Term Monetary Policy Be Determined?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 23 (August), pp. 625–31. 1. See, for example, Johnson (2017), who explains methodological similarities and differences between PCE price index and CPI.Return to text 2. Note that the core indexes are defined somewhat differently. Both core indexes exclude all energy prices. But while the CPI excludes all food prices, the core PCE price index excludes food bought for consumption at home (that is, food purchased at grocery stores) but includes food purchased at restaurants.Return to text 3. The Fed'sMonetary Policy Reportexplains why the Fed chooses the PCE price index to the CPI (see Board of Governors, 2000, footnote 1). Notwithstanding this preference, the FOMC relies on a variety of aggregate price measures, as well as other information on prices and costs, in assessing the path of inflation.Return to text 4. For an explanation of how the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System evaluates changes in inflation, see Board of Governors (2016).Return to text 5. For examples of research on the costs of inflation, see Fischer and Modigliani (1978), Fischer (1981), McCallum (1990), Shiller (1997), and Feldstein (1999). See also the implications for monetary policy drawn by Bernanke and others (1999). Diercks (2019) provides a detailed analysis of work that has appeared on the issue since the mid-1990s.Return to text 6. One long-standing effect of inflation is that it creates incentives that would not otherwise be present to economize on low-interest-bearing money balances. More broadly, an inflationary environment may distort portfolio decisions.Return to text 7. Ultimately, nominal wage contracts will adjust to reflect a higher longer-run inflation rate. In the short run, however, it has been a long-standing feature of the U.S. economy that nominal wages tend to lag developments in prices; see, for example, Mitchell (1913) and Barattieri, Basu, and Gottschalk (2014). Consequently, inflation tends to drain worker purchasing power in the short run.Return to text 8. See, for example, Feldstein (1982).Return to text 9. Owing to contractual and other institutional arrangements, it may be difficult to adjust these streams of payments promptly once it emerges that the inflation rate is higher or lower than expected.Return to text 10. The Federal Reserve has had price stability as a formal part of its mandate since 1977. In 2012, the 2 percent inflation objective was seen as formalizing judgments that the Committee had already made over the previous years about the appropriate inflation rate. For analyses of how the Federal Reserve has interpreted its price-stability mandate over time, see the transcript of the FOMC's January 24–25, 2012, meeting, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20120125meeting.pdf; see also Orphanides (2006) and Nelson (2021).Return to text 11. See, for example, Summers (1991) and Reifschneider and Williams (2000). Blanchard, Dell'Ariccia, and Mauro (2010), among others, have suggested that central banks should consider raising their target inflation rate, on the grounds that conditions since the financial crisis have demonstrated that monetary policy is more constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB) on nominal interest rates than was originally estimated. Ball (2013), for example, has proposed 4 percent as a more appropriate target for the FOMC. While it is certainly likely that earlier analyses of the implications of the ELB significantly underestimated the likelihood of severe recessions and slow recoveries of the sort recently experienced in the United States and elsewhere (see Chung and others, 2012), it is also the case that these analyses did not consider central banks' ability to use large-scale asset purchases and other unconventional tools as a means of providing economic stabilization in the presence of the ELB constraint.Return to text 12. In rejecting a 4 percent inflation target, Bernanke (2010a) suggests that "inflation would be higher and probably more volatile under such a policy" and "inflation expectations would also likely become significantly less stable." According to Bernanke (2010b), "The Federal Reserve over a long period of time has established a great deal of credibility in terms of keeping inflation low, around 2 percent . . . If we were to go to 4 percent, and say we're going to 4 percent, we would risk I think losing a lot of that hard-won credibility because folks would say, well, if we go to 4, why not go to 6 . . . It would be very difficult to tie down credible expectations at 4."Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Hope Economic Mobility Forum at Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi Thank you, Bill, and thank you to Hope Enterprise Corporation and Jackson State University for inviting me to speak today.1It's good to be back in Mississippi. It's Black History Month, and I feel privileged to be at this great historically Black university, speaking on a topic of such vital importance to our country. I made my first trip to this state as a government official a quarter century ago, to Clarksdale, Mississippi. I remember it was a sweltering July day, and we visited a local cabinet manufacturer with Bill Bynum, who, in my judgment, is one of the heroes of the economic justice movement. The company had received financing from Hope, which was then known as the Enterprise Corporation of the Delta. On that hot day, President Clinton called on banks to do more to meet the needs of their communities, to do more under a revamped Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), and to help set up or support Community Development Financial Institutions, or CDFIs, such as Hope, partnering with the newly created CDFI Fund at Treasury. And he called on Congress to pass the New Markets Tax Credit (NMTC) to provide tax credits to individuals and corporations for making equity investments in Community Development Entities (CDEs) in places such as the Mississippi Delta. This, in turn, would help establish and grow local businesses, create jobs, increase local purchasing power, and generate more local investment opportunities. Congress enacted the NMTC in December 2000 with bipartisan support. Since its inception, CDEs like Hope have used the program to support a wide array of job-creating businesses that increase local access to goods and services as well as to increase the availability of important community infrastructure, such as rural hospitals. To date, the NMTC program has awarded over $71 billion of tax credits, which translates, among other things, into 857,000 jobs and almost 239 million square feet of commercial real estate.2In addition, the CDFI Fund has awarded more than $5.5 billion in grants and guaranteed over $2.1 billion in bonds.3 These programs and others like them also enable CDFIs to increase access to financial services in underserved communities, which can lead to opportunity and greater economic mobility. This morning, we heard insightful discussions about economic mobility in the Deep South, including how to create ladders of economic opportunity, and the important role that access to financial services plays in economic mobility. Discrimination, the Racial Wealth Gap, and Disparities in AccessWe all have an interest in promoting a vibrant economy as well as resilient families and communities. In such an economy, people would have access to credit on fair and equal terms to build a secure financial foundation. Yet, despite widespread acceptance of this vision, we have a way to go in making it a reality, particularly for Black households. I'm going to speak to three drivers of this disparity, and three ways that the financial services community should work together to address them. First, there are significant and troubling disparities in lending outcomes for Black individuals and businesses relative to others.4While research suggests that progress has been made in addressing racial discrimination in mortgage lending, regulators continue to find evidence of redlining and pricing discrimination in mortgage lending at individual institutions.5Recent research on auto lending data indicates that racial bias may lead to higher rates for Blacks on financing to purchase cars.6A recent study finds that automating decisions reduced disparities in lending to Black-owned businesses in the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), suggesting the persistence of discrimination in that market.7And the Federal Reserve System's Small Business Credit Survey has found that over many years, Black-owned businesses reported more significant credit access challenges, including feeling discouraged from applying for credit, being denied credit, and being approved for less than the amount they originally applied for, compared to other business owners.8 Compounding these challenges is the racial wealth gap.9Federal Reserve data from 2019 show that White families had about eight times the wealth of Black families.10White families had a median wealth of approximately $188,000, compared to $24,000 for Black families.11Lower levels of wealth make it difficult for people of color to finance a down payment for a home, invest in education, or establish a small business—all central to the American dream. These low levels of wealth also make it difficult for Black families to weather emergencies, such as job loss, or pay for unexpected expenses, which can lead to eviction, repossession of vehicles, and other devastating consequences. And there are racial disparities in financial services. While there has been significant progress over the last twenty-five years in expanding access to banking services, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)'s most recent annual survey of the unbanked and underbanked found that the unbanked rate for Black households was 11.3 percent, compared to just 2.1 percent for White households.12The unbanked rate for Black households in Mississippi was more than double the national average for Black households—23.2 percent.13Lacking a bank account can present challenges for saving—leading to the same insecurities I noted above—and lead to reliance on expensive, alternative products. In addition to higher unbanked rates, only 48.8 percent of Black households nationally had a credit card, compared to 78.1 percent of White households.14Credit card ownership rates were even lower in Mississippi at 28.4 percent for Black households, compared to 64.5 percent for White households.15A credit card not only provides a buffer for unexpected expenses, it also allows individuals to accrue a credit history—central to accessing credit in the future. Addressing These IssuesNow let me turn to some ways to make progress. I'll set out three areas in which financial institutions and regulators should do their part to address these issues, although the issues are complex and multifaceted, and there are no easy solutions. First: Eradicate discrimination in lending and other financial services, and protect consumers from other unfair, abusive, or illegal practices. It is incumbent on financial institutions to devote resources to stamp out these practices, and on regulators to reinforce the importance of this goal through supervision and enforcement. Second: Look for opportunities to support a vibrant and thriving economy for the benefit of everyone. This means seeking out opportunities to invest in low- and moderate-income (LMI) communities, small businesses, and community infrastructure. Third: Develop products and services that can help people save and build wealth. Eradicating DiscriminationI'll start with our collective responsibility for eradicating discrimination in underwriting, lending, and other aspects of financial services. For most of our country's history, the United States government and many state and local governments, as well as many private individuals, corporations, and organizations, did not merely fail to protect minorities from discrimination; they actively reinforced segregation, entrenched inequality, and enforced unequal policies—including through brutal violence.1617 The Civil Rights Movement brought about changes in public opinion and in law. Discrimination in housing and lending became illegal in 1968 and 1974, respectively, through passage of the Fair Housing Act, and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Congress passed laws, such as the Community Reinvestment Act in 1977, to remediate redlining. But history casts a long shadow. How can we—both banks and regulators—understand and address these problems where they persist? To start, there are some areas where we need better data. For example, small business lending data required by section 1071 of the Dodd-Frank Act, once implemented, will provide tangible insights into the availability and pricing of credit for minority small businesses. Banks should also actively analyze their own data to identify areas where racial disparities occur. On-the-ground testing, using techniques such as mystery shopping, may also help to identify discriminatory practices.18And to the extent that a bank uses AI or other algorithmic systems in making lending decisions, they should review the underlying models, such as their credit scoring and underwriting systems, as well as their marketing and loan servicing activities, just as they should for more traditional models.19 Racial bias in the residential real estate market has long been noted as a source of concern.20In January, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's Appraisal Subcommittee held a public hearing on appraisal bias in the residential real estate market. I look forward to working with my fellow regulators to help ensure that individuals are treated equally in the appraisal process regardless of race or the racial composition of neighborhoods. More generally, there is another, glaringly obvious reason for banks to do all they can to eradicate discrimination in lending. It is simply good business. Ensuring that all would-be borrowers are treated equally means more customers, more loans, and better returns for banks. The Federal Reserve and our fellow regulators have a clear responsibility to use our supervisory and enforcement tools.21All firms have a responsibility to operate in a manner consistent with safety and soundness and in compliance with laws and regulations, including those related to consumer protection. Congress provided regulators with supervisory and enforcement tools to help ensure that supervised firms resolve consumer protection weaknesses as well as the more pervasive risk management issues that often lead to those weaknesses. We have a close working relationship with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and other regulators and integrate other regulators' consumer-focused reviews—such as examinations for unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices, as well as fair lending—into our assessments of bank holding companies, including in the context of applications for mergers and acquisitions. Such collaboration is critical to ensure a level playing field and strong consumer protection enforcement. Supporting Vibrant CommunitiesBut even if we address current discriminatory practices, we are still left with the legacy of discrimination and redlining, which helped perpetuate economically depressed Black neighborhoods.22Historically, these neighborhoods have not had the benefit of robust credit and financial services, which hindered their growth and left them less economically connected than wealthier neighborhoods. This lack of connectivity can have a large impact on an individual's economic mobility.23Before turning to the role of regulators, let me first speak a bit about the role of private institutions in supporting these communities. First, CDFIs and Minority Depository Institutions or MDIs are critical because they deliver financial products to places and people often left behind by other financial institutions. Compared to other banks, MDIs originate a greater share of mortgages to minority borrowers and borrowers who live in lower- and middle-income census tracts.24And they played a critical role in disbursing the PPP. Recent legislation bolstered the CDFIs with funds from the Emergency Capital Investment Program (ECIP). Hope Federal Credit Union estimates that the ECIP funds it received will allow it to double its consumer, mortgage, small business, and consumer lending portfolios over the next six years, and Hope was able to mobilize $140 million of PPP funds to small businesses.25 Community banks also serve an important role. Through their lending to local communities and small businesses, they often know their customers personally and engage in community-building activities. Large banks also have a key part to play. For example, in 2022, many large financial institutions initiated or expanded special purpose credit programs, many of which provide mortgage assistance to benefit Black and Hispanic communities.26In addition to their own lending, they help support MDIs and CDFIs through technical assistance and investment. They often share expertise in technology, business support solutions, tax considerations, and bringing programs to scale. And, as is often true, the impact can be greatest through collective efforts. In 2015, while I was at the University of Michigan, I helped a former student, James Wahls, design a program to bring together a local CDFI, philanthropies, and several banks, to launch the Entrepreneurs of Color Fund in Detroit. The Fund extended credit to small businesses in Detroit that otherwise might not qualify for bank lending, at the rate of more than $2 million a year.27And that same approach is now being used by eight additional cities and involves more than twenty local CDFI partners. Closer to home, Hope—together with a large bank and a set of HBCUs—has partnered to form the Deep South Economic Mobility Collaborative. This program provides capital, educational resources, and business support services to small businesses and entrepreneurs in the Deep South, especially those from underserved and under resourced communities. Turning to the role of regulators, we should do what we can to encourage the private efforts I mentioned above. For instance, the Fed's Partnership for Progress helps MDIs navigate their unique business challenges, provides MDIs with resources for technical assistance, and conducts research on the unique challenges faced by LMI communities.28We conduct and promote research on CDFIs and engage in thought-leadership to explore ways to bring additional capital and liquidity to the CDFI sector.29 In addition, regulators should also ensure that our regulations provide appropriate incentives for banks to invest in LMI communities and lend to LMI households. The CRA helps to address redlining and other systemic inequities in access to credit, investment, and banking services faced by LMI communities. The last major revisions to the CRA's regulations were made in 1995, and it is high time that we strengthen and modernize the regulations to reflect the many changes in banking since then. In 2022, the Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency requested comments from the public on a proposal to do just that. Importantly, the proposal would encourage banks to expand access in LMI communities to home mortgage, small business, and other credit, to make community development investments, and engage in lending and banking services. The proposal would adapt the regulations to address changes in the banking sector, including internet and mobile banking, and update the approach to assessment areas. It also would provide more clarity, consistency, and transparency for CRA evaluations and eligible activities. I support the overall objectives of the proposal, and I am pleased that all three agencies are working together to have unified regulations.30The agencies are benefitting from the thoughtful comment letters we received on the proposal, and all three agencies are hard at work finalizing the rule. Another area where Congress directed the Board to consider the convenience and needs of communities is through our review of bank mergers. As I've said before, mergers are a feature of vibrant industries, but the advantages that firms seek to gain through mergers must be weighed against the risks posed, and the costs and benefits to the community. There is likely important work we can do to improve our assessment of the convenience and needs factor for bank mergers. We also have an important role to play in ensuring that our safety and soundness regulations do not needlessly impede financial inclusion. For example, banks can make investments that support LMI communities, called public welfare investments, subject to certain caps. We plan to change our approach to computing the public welfare investment caps for state member banks using New Markets Tax Credits, and similar credits, which would allow state member banks to make additional investment in LMI communities. And as ECIP funds are made available, regulators have an important role to play in ensuring our examiners are informed and knowledgeable about the work being conducted under these new programs. Responsive ProductsLast, let me turn to the need to develop products that are responsive to customer needs. As many have said, it's expensive to be poor. And many poor people lack any financial slack, such as savings, to tide them over through an emergency. No slack often means that a small problem can snowball into larger ones. As a result, low- and moderate-income consumers often use alternative financial services, such as payday loans, which can help fill needs but are often high-cost and can lead to debt traps. There is an opportunity for traditional banks and mission-driven organizations to fill this gap, but to be effective, they need to understand consumer preferences and behavior to provide products and services that meet these needs in a safer and fairer way. Starting with customer preference, we know that speed can be key. Income disruption and unexpected expenses are more common in LMI households, and quick access to a loan can make all the difference. With proper safeguards, unsecured small dollar credit to consumers with less-than-prime credit scores can be very important in helping people meet this need.31We have seen banks begin offering small dollar loans to some existing customers by factoring account data into the provision of credit. Now there is a growing number of additional banks in this space. These products are typically available through the bank's online interface, which streamlines the process and speeds up decisions. Although some of these may be considered high-cost products, they are still less costly than payday loans or the cost of what many banks charge for overdraft protection. As an operator and regulator of payment systems, the Federal Reserve also has a role in faster payments. We're working to launch FedNow, which, once widely adopted, will better enable banks to offer customers the ability to send and receive money immediately at low cost. We can also make a difference by updating our rules on check clearance, so that consumers and small businesses still receiving checks have access to their funds in a timelier manner. And of course, we need strong consumer protections in place so that consumers don't have to worry about making payments in a safe way. The Bank On initiative has been hugely successful in both identifying bank account features that meet customer preferences and getting those accounts into the hands of consumers. Strongly recommended features include low minimum balances, no overdraft fees, robust transaction options, and online bill pay.32More than 46,000 banks and credit union branches across the country currently offer Bank On certified accounts, and more than 5.8 million Bank On-certified accounts were open and active in 2021.33 In addition to considering customer preference, product design should help to counter, not lean into, biases that can lead to poor financial decision-making.34Being aware of these can help banks help customers better understand risks and structure products that are designed to overcome, and not exacerbate, these problems. For instance, banks should ensure that their overdraft policies frame financial decisions in a transparent and fair way and avoid unexpected and hefty fees.35Customers should be empowered with timely information on balances so that they can avoid inadvertent overdrafts, and best practice builds in a grace period for customers to cure their overdrafts. Some banks have eliminated overdraft fees entirely. Regulators need to understand both human decision-making and market context in designing the right rules of the road. Regulators also need to engage with techniques, such as cash flow underwriting and alternative data, new credit models, and other technologies that hold out the promise to increase access and reduce bias in credit intermediation.36 Diversity in the workforce of financial institutions also matters for financial inclusion. For instance, working with minority loan officers improves credit access for minority borrowers, which suggests that underrepresentation of minorities among loan officers adversely impacts minority access to credit.37And we regulators need to focus on our own diversity as well. ConclusionTo conclude, I've focused today on using the tools we have to address discrimination in lending, supporting communities, and developing products and services to meet customer needs. As I said at the outset, these are complex problems with no easy solutions, but we have an obligation to do our part. One final important role we have to play is encouraging awareness of these issues, and conferences such as these have tremendous value in this regard. On that note, once again, I'd like to thank Hope and Jackson State University for hosting today's event, and I look forward to your questions. ReferencesBarr, M., Mullainathan, S. & Shafir, E. (2012). "Behaviorally Informed Regulation."No Slack. Bhutta, N., Chang, A. C., Dettling, L. J. & Hsu, J. W. (2020). "Disparities in Wealth by Race and Ethnicity in the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances."FEDS Notes 2020, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). Bhutta, N., Hizmo, A. & Ringo, D. (2022). "How Much Does Racial Bias Affect Mortgage Lending? Evidence from Human and Algorithmic Credit Decisions."Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS).Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). Chetty, R., Jackson, M. O., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., Hiller, A., Oppenheimer, S. & the Opportunity Insights Team (2022). "Social Capital and Economic Mobility (PDF)."Opportunity Insights: Non-Technical Research Summary. Cook, L. (2014). Violence and Economic Activity: Evidence from African American Patents, 1870 to 1940,19 J. of Econ Growth 221-257. Evans, C. & Pence, K. (2021). "How Can Regulation Facilitate Inclusion in Fintech?"Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Community Development Innovation Review. Frame, W. S., Huang, R., Mayer, E. J. & Sunderam, A. (2022). "The Impact of Minority Representation at Mortgage Lenders."National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper30125. Friesenhahn, S. & Kwan, S. (2021). "Minority Banks During the COVID-19 Pandemic (PDF)."Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco FRBSF Economic Letter2021-20. Howell, S. T., Kuchler, T., Snitkof, D., Stroebel, J. & Wong, J. (2022) "Lender Automation and Racial Disparities in Credit Access (PDF)."National Bureau ofEconomic Research Working Paper29364. Lanning, J. A. (2021). "Testing Models of Economic Discrimination Using the Discretionary Markup of Indirect Auto Loans (PDF)." Presented at the Racial Inequality and Disparities in Financial Markets conference,Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Morse, A. & Pence, K. (2020). "Technological Innovation and Discrimination in Housing Finance."Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-018.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). Munnell, A. H., Tootell, G. M. B., Browne, L. E. & McEneaney, J. (1996). "Mortgage Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data."American Economic Review86 (1): pp. 25-53. Rothstein, R. (2017).The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our GovernmentSegregated America. Rothwell, J. & Perry, A. M. (2022). "How Racial Bias in Appraisals Affects the Devaluation of Homes in Majority-Black Neighborhoods." The Brookings Institution. 1. The views here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Christine Graham and Kirsten Noland for their assistance in preparing this text.Return to text 2.Treasury Announces $5 Billion in New Markets Tax Credit Awards to Revitalize Low-Income and Distressed Communities. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. October 26, 2022.Return to text 3.Treasury Announces $5 Billion in New Markets Tax Credit Awards to Revitalize Low-Income and Distressed Communities. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. October 26, 2022.Return to text 4. See, e.g.,Data Point: 2021 Mortgage Market Activity and Trends (PDF). Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and theFederal Reserve Small Business Credit Survey, 2022. Federal Reserve System.Return to text 5. Compare Munnell, Tootell, Browne & McEneaney (1996) with Bhutta, Hizmo, & Ringo (2022). With respect to individual banks, see,e.g., Compl.,U.S. v. Lakeland Bank, No. 2:22-cv-05736 (D. N.J.) (alleging that Lakeland Bank engaged in unlawful redlining in the Newark metropolitan area by failing to provide mortgage lending services to Black and Hispanic neighborhoods);Compl.,U.S. v. City National Bank, No. 2:23-00204 (C.D. California, filed January 12, 2023) (alleging that City National Bank engaged in unlawful redlining in the Los Angeles Metropolitan Division by avoiding providing credit services to majority-Black and Hispanic neighborhoods because of the race, color and national origin of the people living in those neighborhoods);Compl.,U.S. v. Evolve Bank and Trust, No. 22-cv-2667 (W.D. Tennessee, filed September 29, 2022) (alleging that Evolve Bank and Trust engaged in lending discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and national origin in the pricing of mortgage loans).Return to text 6. See Lanning (2021).Return to text 7. See Howell, Kuchler, Snitkof, Stroebel & Wong (2022).Return to text 8.Small Business Credit Survey 2022: Report on Firms Owned by People of Color. Federal Reserve System.Return to text 9. For example, see Yellen, J. L. (2014).Perspective on Inequality and Opportunity from the Survey of Consumer Finances.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 10.Survey of Consumer Finances, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 11.Survey of Consumer Finances, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. See also Bhutta, Chang, Dettling & Hsu (2020).Return to text 12.FDICNational Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households(PDF). Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).Return to text 13. For state-level data, see the FDIC Custom Data Table Tool.Return to text 14.FDICNational Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households(PDF). Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).Return to text 15. For state-level data, see the FDIC Custom Data Table Tool.Return to text 16. See Rothstein (2017).Return to text 17. See Cook (2014).Return to text 18. Mystery shopping involves two individuals who are identical except for a protected class attribute (such as race), and has these individuals apply for credit products. The results are examined for disparate treatment based on that attribute.Return to text 19. See SR Letter 11-7. See also Morse & Pence (2020), which explores the potential of fintech to increase financial inclusion and attendant consumer protection risks.Return to text 20. See Rothwell and Perry (2022).Return to text 21. The Dodd-Frank Act divided responsibility for supervising banks under consumer protection laws between the prudential regulators and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), with the CFPB having primary responsibility for certain laws for banks with assets greater than $10 billion. Specifically, the Federal Reserve and the CFPB have overlapping authority for state member banks on Unfair, Deceptive, and Abusive Acts and Practices (UDAP/UDAAP) matters. The Federal Reserve also has responsibility for supervision of bank holding companies, including annually assessing risk management and compliance.Return to text 22. See, e.g., Rothstein, R. (2017).Return to text 23. See Chetty, Jackson, Kuchler, Stroebel, Hiller, Oppenheimer & team (2022).Return to text 24. See Friesenhahn & Kwan (2021).Return to text 25.Testimony of William J. (Bill) Bynum, Hope Credit Union, Hope Enterprise Corporation, Hope Policy Institute—Before the United Stated House Financial Services CommitteeFebruary 16, 2022(PDF).Return to text 26. The Government-Sponsored Enterprises also published Equitable Housing Plans in June 2022 announcing plans to develop special purpose credit programs. Freddie Mac's Equitable Housing Plan described its multi-year plan to develop its own special purpose credit program and provide liquidity pursuant to the program https://www.freddiemac.com/about/pdf/Freddie-Mac-Equitable-Housing-Finance-Plan.pdf. Fannie Mae's Equitable Housing Plan described its strategy for developing special purpose credit programs, including it plans to identify markets to pilot and test a potential program https://www.fanniemae.com/media/43636/display.Return to text 27.Entrepreneurs of Color Fund, Detroit, MI.Return to text 28.Minority Depository Institutions.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System andReport on Promoting Minority Depository Institutions September 2022.Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 29.2021 CDFI Survey.Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond andTransforming Communities: Driving and Assessing Investment.Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text 30.Summary of Key Objectives of the Interagency CRA Proposal(PDF). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 31. In May 2020, the Federal Reserve, working with other regulators, issued theInteragency Lending Principles for Making Responsible Small-Dollar Loans(PDF)to encourage lending to small businesses and consumers.Return to text 32.Bank On National Account Services, 2023-2024(PDF). Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund: Bank On.Return to text 33.Bank On Accounts.Bank On andThe Bank On National Data Hub: Findings from 2021(2022). Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.Return to text 34. See Barr, Mullainathan & Shafir (2012).Return to text 35. See, e.g.,Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin, July 2018 (PDF). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 36. See, e.g., Evans & Pence (2021).Return to text 37. See Frame, Huang, Mayer & Sunderam (2022).Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the 2023 Arkansas State University Agribusiness Conference, Jonesboro, Arkansas Thank you, Bert, and thank you for the opportunity to talk about where the economy is heading, what the Federal Reserve is doing to get inflation back down to our 2 percent goal, and how all that is likely to affect American agriculture.1 The big picture is that the U.S. economy is adjusting well so far to the higher interest rates that are necessary to rein in inflation. But inflation remains quite elevated, and so more needs to be done. Although economic activity slowed in 2022, I expect the Fed will need to keep a tight stance of monetary policy for some time to slow activity further in 2023. That is what I believe is needed to bring demand and supply into better alignment and lower inflation toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent target. Some believe that inflation will come down quite quickly this year. That would be a welcome outcome. But I'm not seeing signals of this quick decline in the economic data, and I am prepared for a longer fight to get inflation down to our target. So, what is my take on the recent data? It looks like the economy grew at a solid pace in the final quarter of the year, the labor market remained tight, and inflation continued to retreat. After adjusting for inflation, personal consumption grew at around a 2 percent rate, though it contracted in the last two months of the year amid some pretty significant headwinds. One of those headwinds was high inflation, including for food and agricultural products. After accounting for inflation, spending on food consumed at home fell in 2022 after rising strongly in 2020 and 2021, the effect of both large price increases over the past year and the normalization of spending on groceries, which surged when people stayed home during the pandemic and reversed when they returned to restaurants. Looking forward, I expect personal consumption will grow modestly and price increases will moderate, and I think such outcomes would bode well for the agricultural sector this year. It looks as though economic activity may be moderating further in the first quarter of 2023, but I expect the U.S. economy to continue growing at a modest pace this year, supported by a strong labor market and by encouraging progress in lowering inflation. Though we have made progress reducing inflation, I want to be clear today that the job is not done. Inflation is still too high relative to the price stability goal of the dual mandate assigned to the Federal Reserve by Congress. The Fed has defined that goal as 2 percent annual inflation, as measured by the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, but another yardstick you could use is when high prices for groceries and other things are no longer front page news, and when farmers can worry less about rising costs for fertilizer and other inputs. That is where we intend to get to, and thus the FOMC last week increased the target range for the federal funds rate by another 25 basis points, to 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent. Our intention is to tighten financial conditions, including raising the cost of credit, to dampen demand and spending to further reduce inflation. Of course, we know that higher interest rates pose challenges for farmers and ranchers who must borrow to smooth out the costs and returns from agriculture over the year. But excessive inflation is a larger challenge because it has the potential to become a lasting problem weighing on economic growth, undermining living standards, and hurting consumers, who farmers depend on. That is why I am determined to get the job done, get high inflation off the front pages, and back to being something that households and businesses don't think too much about when making decisions. Continued upward pressure on inflation comes, in part, from a very tight labor market. The Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey for December continued to show that the demand for workers remains robust, with job openings increasing by over 500,000 at the end of last year. Based on last Friday's initial estimate, we learned that the U.S. economy created a whopping 517,000 jobs in January, 330,000 more than the solid growth that was expected by economic forecasters. Furthermore, the unemployment rate ticked down to 3.4 percent, the lowest level since 1951. Such employment gains mean labor income will also be robust and buoy consumer spending, which could maintain upward pressure on inflation in the months ahead. For employers, the very strong labor market makes it hard to find and retain workers. One effect of this tightness is seen in wages and other compensation, which ultimately show up in the prices that consumers pay for goods and services. For example, last year the Employment Cost Index (ECI), which tracks movements in labor costs, including both wages and benefits, increased over 5 percent, the highest rate since 1984. We want to see wages grow but at a pace that is consistent with our goal of stable prices. We have seen some moderation in compensation growth in recent months but not enough. The ECI for hourly compensation for private industry workers increased at an annual rate of 4 percent over the three months ending in December, a step down from the 4.3 percent gain recorded over the three months ending in September and the 6.3 percent increase in June but still a strong increase. More recently, the 12-month change in a narrower measure of labor costs, average hourly earnings, was about 4-1/2 percent in January, continuing its slow deceleration from 5-1/2 percent last summer. The data are moving in the right direction, but I will watch for further slowing because we don't want excessive wage increases to be a potential source of higher inflation in the future. So now let's talk about inflation. I will start with overall inflation and then focus on the different components, including food. I will talk about what those components can tell us about the direction of overall inflation and how I look at the different parts of inflation in my approach to monetary policy. Figure 1depicts inflation measured by two common indexes. No matter how one measures it, inflation has been running too hot for too long. "Overall" or "headline" inflation indexes are measured as the rate of increase in the average price level of a broad group of goods and services, called a market basket. Government statistics on the inflation rate will be a function of the specific goods and services included in the market basket. Including a different set of goods and services in the market basket will result in a different overall inflation rate. Probably the most often-discussed inflation measure in the United States is one based on the consumer price index (CPI). The CPI is widely used as a cost-of-living index to adjust Social Security and other payments. The CPI puts considerable weight on the prices of food, energy, and shelter. These three items account for about 50 percent of the expenditures in the CPI basket.2 A second measure that is frequently watched is the one I mentioned earlier, the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, which places less weight on food, energy and shelter—they make up about 30 percent of the expenditures in the PCE basket. The FOMC chose the PCE index over the CPI for its inflation target in part because it includes a broader set of goods and services in its market basket and is widely believed to better capture changes in the mix of goods and services purchased by consumers. Monetary policy works with a lag, and after the Federal Reserve started raising interest rates last March, inflation peaked in the middle of 2022 and has been falling gradually since then. Twelve-month PCE inflation hit a high of 7 percent in June but ended the year at 5 percent. By comparison, over the final three months of 2022, headline inflation was much lower, running at an annualized rate of just 2.1 percent. The difference between the three-month and 12-months changes is a signal of ongoing moderation. As has been the case since the summer, falling energy prices are a big reason for lower inflation in the last few months, though food price inflation also moderated in the final few months of 2022. These improvements are welcome news, but we need to keep them in perspective. As we can see in the figure, though PCE inflation is down from its peak, it is still quite elevated. And while the recent trend is encouraging, the improvements over the past year have been coming in ebbs and flows and it likely will continue this way. I need to be confident that inflation is declining in a sustained manner towards our 2 percent target, so I will need to see continued moderation in inflation before my outlook changes. So where do I think inflation is heading? You will often hear economists talk about core inflation, which strips out energy and food prices, which tend to be volatile. The core measure is considered a better guide to the direction of future inflation. You might wonder why it is that the Fed doesn't just target core inflation in measuring progress toward our price stability goal. There are some good reasons for keeping the focus on overall inflation, and in front of an audience of people who pay a lot of attention to food price inflation, I thought I would take a couple minutes to explain why I consider food and all of the components of inflation to be so important in my approach to setting monetary policy. The argument for stripping out food and energy prices is that they tend to be quite volatile, with big ups and downs tending to equal out over time, and thus do not provide a clear signal of how inflation in these categories will evolve. One can see the recent volatility infigure 2that reports 12-month rates of inflation for food and energy. Energy prices were decreasing for most of 2020 (they fell 10 percent during that period) but then switched to very large increases in 2021 and the first half of 2022. In mid-2022 we saw energy prices up about 40 percent from the year before. By December, that retraced to less than a 7 percent increase over 2021. And I'm sure I don't have to tell anyone that food inflation has been quite high relative to its pre-pandemic average. Of course, food prices haven't increased as much as energy prices, but food inflation has risen notably in 2021 and 2022 and has been running above 10 percent recently, which is unusually high. I know that farmers have been dealing with sharply rising input costs, and that is a significant factor driving up wholesale and retail prices for many food products. As shown infigure 3, inflation for agricultural chemicals, such as fertilizer, skyrocketed in 2021 and continued up in early 2022 and, though this inflation has moderated in recent months, the price level of agricultural chemicals remains very high. Core inflation, as shown inFigure 4, didn't rise as much as headline inflation in this recent period of high food and energy price increases, and lately it hasn't moderated as much. Core inflation stood at 4.4 percent in December, over double the Fed's 2 percent target for headline inflation. Core inflation includes a measure of housing services, which is what households pay for rent or the equivalent for those who own their homes. Housing services inflation has been stubbornly high for all of 2022 and is a big factor driving up core inflation. There is good reason to believe rents will moderate significantly over this year and so some people have suggested that the focus should be on a "super core" measure of inflation that excludes food, energy, and housing. That would make inflation look not nearly as bad over the last year or two and also likely not show much improvement in the coming months. But there are a few reasons why I don't let these stripped-down measures of inflation shape my views of the inflation environment. First, yes, historically food and energy prices have been volatile, and it has not been unusual to see price increases followed by price declines over fairly short periods of time, but that isn't the recent history. In the last two years, prices for these goods and services have been moving largely in one direction—up—and even the decline in energy prices we saw in the second half of 2022 hasn't offset the huge increases earlier. The second reason that I wouldn't exclude food, energy, and housing prices, or want to move toward a narrower inflation target, is that, by any measure of headline inflation, they constitute a large share of expenses paid by people. Excluding this large share of consumer spending doesn't give you an accurate picture of what consumers are facing in their everyday lives, and that is a perspective that policymakers should never forget. The third reason to include, rather than exclude, these prices in considering inflation is that they make up an even larger share of expenses for lower-income people, who have less savings and other means to deal with the ups and downs of their finances and the economy. Recent research indicates that the share of overall spending that lower-income households dedicate to food, energy and housing is about 1.2 times (or 20 percent more) than the share spent by higher-income households. Because of this disparity, when inflation peaked last summer, lower-income households effectively faced inflation that was a percentage point higher than was paid by higher-income households.3 Lastly, and this is really the bottom line, the Fed has stated that its target for inflation is headline PCE prices. So, to meet the Fed's price stability objective, policymakers are accounting for all the categories of goods and services that affect households. With that context, let me take a few minutes on each of the three big categories to highlight how they have been moving, and I think there is some good news. Let's look at each category in the order of how much consumers spend on them each month. Housing services are about 15 percent of the PCE basket.Figure 5shows how housing inflation has been evolving both when measured on a 12-month basis (left panel) and 3-month basis (right panel). As I just noted, housing inflation has been stubbornly elevated. This is true if you look at inflation over the past year or just at recent months. But high frequency measures of market rents (for new leases by new tenants) have slowed sharply, suggesting an upcoming slowing in the rate of inflation in this part of the PCE basket. Because rents usually don't change until leases run out, these recent declines in market rent inflation will only show through to the official inflation measure with a delay. So I expect, over time, that housing inflation will move down to be more in line with core inflation. Turning to food, which represents about 7.5 percent of consumption in the PCE basket,figure 6shows that the 12-month change in PCE food prices has greatly outpaced that of core PCE inflation over the past couple of years. More recently, we can see that the 3-month change in the PCE price index for food has slowed considerably, which is a good sign. But food inflation is still above the average annual pace of 1.1 percent over the ten years preceding the pandemic. This ongoing elevated food inflation likely reflects passthrough of the past strong increases in food commodity prices, rising labor and fuel costs, as well as supply-chain bottlenecks in packaging and transportation that have limited supplies amid strong demand. For example, as seen infigure 7, spot prices for cattle and soybeans are well above their levels at the onset of the pandemic, likely boosted by the sharply rising input costs farmers have been facing, which I discussed earlier. However, futures prices for these commodities suggest limited movements in these prices through year end. If this plays out, with a slowdown in wage increases that should occur because of tighter monetary policy, this should help continue to moderate food inflation over the next few years. Finally, let's turn to energy inflation. Households spend less than 5 percent of their PCE basket on gasoline, electricity, and heating but, as seen in the left panel offigure 8, the energy price index skyrocketed over the past couple of years, reflecting a surge in crude oil prices after the pandemic recession which was exacerbated by Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Turning to the 3-month change (the right panel) energy prices have been declining sharply recently and we expect them to continue to decline this year, reflecting the path of crude oil futures prices and the expectation that unusually elevated gasoline margins will, on average, decline over the remainder of this year. So, what do I take away from all this? I think there are practical implications for getting a clear picture of the economy and setting appropriate monetary policy, and also a reminder for me about the trust I bear as a public official. Most practically, if I had focused on core inflation over the last two years and tended to look past increases for food and energy, and especially for housing, I would have missed an alarming increase in inflation, and reacted more slowly than my Federal Reserve colleagues and I appropriately did to start bringing down inflation. The Federal Open Market Committee raised interest rates more quickly than it had in more than forty years, and I think the progress we have made on inflation shows how important it was to act so urgently. Just as importantly, excluding those prices would have neglected how much hardship this high inflation has been for many people, especially lower-income individuals and families. High inflation is a very different experience when you are effectively paying a higher rate than others, when a higher share of your expenses and income are spent on necessities, and when you have little in savings to draw on, as lower-income people do. When I talk about how important it is to win this inflation fight, it is partly in recognition of this inescapable reality for many millions of people. Fortunately, there are signs that food, energy, and shelter prices will moderate this year. An important factor has been the Federal Reserve's ongoing fight to lower inflation through tighter monetary policy. We are seeing that effort begin to pay off, but we have farther to go. And, it might be a long fight, with interest rates higher for longer than some are currently expecting. But I will not hesitate to do what is needed to get my job done. 1. I am grateful to Katia Peneva for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Food at home, energy and housing represent 49 percent of the CPI basket, whereas all food, energy and housing are 54 percent of the market basket.Return to text 3. Based on work by Jake Orchard (2022) that matches consumption spending by income with CPI data. See https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4033572.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Global Interdependence Center Conference: Digital Money, Decentralized Finance, and the Puzzle of Crypto, La Jolla, California Thanks to the conference organizers for inviting me to participate today. It is great to be back at a Global Interdependence Center conference. Given recent events in crypto, it is certainly timely to have a day of discussions related to digital assets.1 Before diving into today's talks, which will touch on various parts of the crypto ecosystem, I'd like to clearly define some concepts to ensure we're all talking about the same things. I think of the crypto ecosystem as consisting of three parts: The latter two parts may facilitate the trading of crypto-assets, but also have much broader applications. First, let's consider distributed ledger technology. The technology is simply a database management protocol that has various permissions regarding who can write to the database and who can read the database. Although this technology is fundamental for the creation of crypto-assets, there is nothing in this technology that restricts it to being used solely in the crypto ecosystem. In fact, distributed ledger technology is being explored to potentially address a wide range of data management problems. Next, there are various technologies related to crypto-assets. One is the use of smart contracts in peer-to-peer trading. Smart contracts also can be used in conjunction with a centralized data management protocol to automate the execution of certain transactions in non-crypto-assets. For example, over time, they could be used to speed up the clearance and settlement of securities transactions. Another emerging technology is tokenization. In any trade of assets, there are issues regarding how much personal information you need to provide to conduct the trade. For example, some personal information is needed to protect against the possibility of anonymous trading, which can promote money laundering. Tokenization, when combined with data vaults to securely store personal information, can be used to trade objects in a way that protects one's identity from being exploited for profit. While these technological developments are still in their infancy, they have potential applications beyond the crypto ecosystem that could lead to substantial productivity enhancements in other industries. This leaves us with the crypto-assets themselves. The question is, why would someone hold such an asset? What is the value proposition of such an asset? The answer isn't new or unique, but rather is based on economic relationships that result in objects having value. One reason objects have value is because of their intrinsic properties. For example, the value of corn derives in part from the fact that it can be used for food or fuel, or in some cases for Thanksgiving centerpieces. Intuition suggests that if an object has no intrinsic value, then the price of that object should be zero—why pay for something that has no fundamental value? Shockingly, it turns out that objects may be valued well above what their intrinsic properties would suggest. Since Paul Samuelson's seminal work in 1958 on intertemporal consumption smoothing, economists have known that an intrinsically useless object can trade at a positive price.2Such an object's value is driven purely by belief. If I believe someone will pay a positive price for this object in the future, then I may be willing to pay a positive price now, carry it across time, and sell it when I need to consume other goods and services. Samuelson referred to this concept as "the social contrivance of money." While an intrinsically useless object can trade at a positive price, we also know that there is always a second equilibrium price for this object, which is zero. What if one day, beliefs change and I no longer believe that someone will pay me for this object in the future? Then I clearly shouldn't pay anything for it today, so its price goes to zero. There are many intrinsically useless objects that still have value. Consider things like baseball cards and celebrity autographs, which are pieces of cardboard and paper with pictures or scribbles on them. Based on their fundamental properties, these things have little to no intrinsic value, yet can be in high demand and command staggering prices. What happens if one day, no one wants to collect baseball cards? As valuable as they are today, they wouldn't be worth much, if anything. This brings us to crypto-assets. To me, a crypto-asset is nothing more than a speculative asset, like a baseball card. If people believe others will buy it from them in the future at a positive price, then it will trade at a positive price today. If not, its price will go to zero. If people want to hold such an asset, then go for it. I wouldn't do it, but I don't collect baseball cards, either. However, if you buy crypto-assets and the price goes to zero at some point, please don't be surprised and don't expect taxpayers to socialize your losses. The upshot of this is that crypto-assets are risky and many of the firms dealing in them are in their infancy. That has come to bear in the past year as several prominent crypto-related firms have filed for bankruptcy, including payment platforms, exchanges, crypto lenders, and hedge funds. The declines in crypto-asset values and associated business failures have led to many investors in the crypto industry getting hurt. As I mentioned in a speech last summer, surveys conducted indicated that somewhere between 12 and 20 percent of U.S. adults have owned, traded, or used crypto-assets.3As losses mount, the debate is turning to whether there should be better investor protections in place. But even institutional investors, with significant resources to conduct due diligence of investments, have felt the pain of the so-called crypto winter. For example, it has been reported that at least 15 public pension funds, which manage public employee retirement funds, had investments in the now-bankrupt crypto-asset exchange, FTX.4 While I don't care if people take on risky investments or engage in risky business ventures, banks and other financial intermediaries must engage in any activity they do in a safe and sound manner. I'm supportive of prudent innovation in the financial system, while at the same time concerned about banks engaging in activities that present a heightened risk of fraud and scams, legal uncertainties, and the prevalence of inaccurate and misleading financial disclosures. As with any customer in any industry, a bank engaging with crypto customers would have to be very clear about the customers' business models, risk-management systems, and corporate governance structures to ensure that the bank is not left holding the bag if there is a crypto meltdown. And banks considering engaging in crypto-asset-related activities face a critical task to meet the "know your customer" and "anti-money laundering" requirements, which they in no way are allowed to ignore. So far, spillovers to other parts of the financial system from the stress in the crypto industry have been minimal. The lack of spillovers to date may be attributable in part to the relatively limited number of interconnections between the crypto ecosystem and the banking system. While it is critical that we ensure that the financial stability risks associated with crypto-assets are mitigated, it is important that we keep the various parts of the crypto ecosystem distinct in our minds as the debate about if and how to regulate crypto rolls on. Doing so will ensure we do not unduly limit the development and potential future uses of the positive features of the crypto ecosystem. With that, I'd be happy to answer some questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. Paul Samuelson, "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the Social Contrivance of Money,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. LXVI (December 1958): 467–482.Return to text 3. Christopher J. Waller, "Risk in the Crypto Markets" (remarks at the SNB-CIF Conference on Cryptoassets and Financial Innovation, Zurich, Switzerland, June 3, 2022).Return to text 4. "Have Pensions Lost Money on FTX?," Equable.org, December 1, 2022.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Sadie Collective Research Reception, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Bola, for that kind introduction. And welcome, everyone.1It is a pleasure to be here and to see so many friendly faces—including Bola and my friend and colleague David Wessel—as we celebrate the Sadie Collective and these gifted, young aspiring economists. Dr. Sadie T. Mossell Alexander has been a touchstone in my life and career. By that I mean that she has provided inspiration, of course. But more specifically, she keeps showing up at times that turn out to be inflection points along the trajectory of my life. I should note that I mean that figuratively. I realize that as an economist, people might assume I am too literal and quantitative to employ metaphor. As my former students among you know, I still have to give an alert when a joke or metaphor is coming! I first "met" Dr. Alexander in the sixth grade, when my mother initiated the Nu Tau chapter of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority on the campus of Georgia College and State University, where she was the first tenured African American faculty member. I heard conversations about all the Delta presidents, but Dr. Alexander struck a particular chord with me. I grew up in a college town, in a family of academics who prized education. Yet, at that point in my life, I instinctively divided academia into two discrete spheres: humanities and hard sciences. Sadie Alexander introduced me to the social sciences, which were, to me, the absolute best of both worlds. I still think so. The next year, I took what I learned from Dr. Alexander to the county social science fair to present the results of my first foray into research in economics: "What are the Major Causes of Unemployment among Black Americans?" While I never told this story to my former students who founded the Sadie Collective, I have told it a few times in recent months, and I will probably tell it a few more. But I think this is the last time I will admit there exists photographic evidence of myself at a middle school academic fair. We all know from a large empirical literature that there is plenty of evidence showing this is life's most awkward period! Dr. Alexander showed up again in college when I went to Spelman and became a Delta. Looking back, I see the "Sadie parallel" not just in the academic path I took, but in the community I joined. I was surrounded by brilliant, fearless, thoughtful, civic-minded women who prized intellect, hard work, and public service. They were as aspirational and inspirational as Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander was. But while she was a singular pioneer in her field, my classmates were legion—not one future scientist or politician or executive or lawyer or medical doctor, but dozens. The Spelman students who intern this summer at top-tier law firms and Fortune 500 companies will likely see executives and senior leaders who look like them. Deltas and other members of the Divine Nine sororities among them will likely meet fellow sorority members on Day One. Diversity is essential in every profession. That is especially true in professions that thrive and evolve by answering questions, like economics. The American economy is a vast and intricate machine that is made up of its people. A profession that analyzes the lives and behavior of the country is at its best when it reflects the population it seeks to understand. As a result, we can pose questions that come from different perspectives. Everyone here knows the data on representation and the research on the experiences of economists from underrepresented backgrounds. We also know that economic conundrums persist. And we know that solutions are more likely to come if more people from different backgrounds enter the field and if each wave of newly minted economists reflects the makeup of the country. We are more likely to consider professions when we see ourselves reflected in their ranks, especially in prominent positions. That can be a Catch-22: You cannot see yourself reflected in the ranks if you are underrepresented, yet you cannot grow the ranks without representation. But our hands are not tied. We can do more to raise the profiles of past and present standouts in the field, like Dr. Alexander—especially during Black History Month, I think about the names we remember and how we can expand the roster for historical contributions. But we should also strive to celebrate our contemporaries in the now, to ensure that history records their excellence, like Willene Johnson, Margaret Sims, Erika James, Julianne Malveaux, Cecilia Conrad, and Ebonya Washington. Anna Gifty Opoku-Agyeman and Fanta Traoré. My mentors, Alice Rivlin, Emmett Rice, Sandy Darity, Christina Romer, and Janet Yellen. That support and recognition should be a focus for everyone in the profession, not just economists from underrepresented backgrounds. When I was told to change my research subject because no one would read it; when my (male) grad school peers assumed I could not do the math; even when I was tempted to pursue a philosophy PhD, I had mentors who were very much in the majority that believed in my work and ideas. Like my dissertation advisor Barry Eichengreen; Noble Laureates Paul Romer, George Akerlof, Ken Arrow, and Milton Friedman; and an English economist who convinced me on the side of a mountain to pursue economics. They believed I would make a good economist, and they were some of my most enthusiastic supporters. We can work to create and support networks, as other professions have done, to help expand their talent pools—something the Sadie Collective is already doing with deep commitment and impact. Those of us in the profession should make a concerted effort to mentor young and aspiring economists from all backgrounds and to recognize when we serve as examples to those who do not feel represented or seen. We can also do more to keep students on the academic path and young professionals in the field—two of the stress points in the "pipeline problem." The Sadie Collective highlights important research and the young minds helping to shape the next wave of economists. I am not one to play favorites, and all of the research projects covered great topics. But fully half investigate innovation and dynamism, an area of my own research. The last time I ran into Dr. Alexander—again, metaphorically speaking, of course—was my first day on the job at the Federal Reserve as a Governor. I made my way to the first floor of the Martin Building, to see her portrait, which hangs in the building where I was able to mark my own "first"—one that would not have been possible without Sadie T.M. Alexander. As policymakers, my colleagues and I make decisions that impact the entire country. We are driven by data, which we collect in abundance. But our own experiences—including our education, professional and lived experience, and personal understanding—inform how we seek out and examine those data and discern what they mean for the future. It is wonderful to join the Sadie Collective today as we celebrate these women and their research, and the positive contributions they and their peers will make to the economics profession and to the world of economic policy. It feels like another example of Dr. Alexander showing up to mark an inflection point. Thank you all, thank you for your work, Sadie Collective, and warm congratulations to: Sarah DeschenesPeyton DunhamNishan JonesCamillah CantyTarikua ErdaLauryn Mwale 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Midwest Cyber Workshop, organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis Introductory RemarksGood morning. It is a pleasure to join you, and I appreciate the invitation to speak to you virtually for this inaugural Midwest Cyber Workshop hosted by the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis.1 Cyberattacks threaten businesses and consumers everywhere—none of us is beyond the reach of those that initiate these attacks. Community banks have been the target of cyber and ransomware attacks, and they frequently name cybersecurity as one of the top risks facing the banking industry. In my conversations with bankers, some note the difficulty in attracting and retaining the staff needed to mitigate cyber risks. While there are no easy solutions in the defense against cyberattacks, close coordination among all of the groups represented at this conference is a good first step. As I consider the Federal Reserve's role in supervising cybersecurity, it is important to identify where our engagement can be most effective to enhance the security of our regulated entities. Our efforts must be focused on both banks and their third-party service providers. In my remarks today, I will briefly discuss four topics. First are the implications of evolving technologies and their impacts on the cyber risk landscape. Second, I will discuss how customer demand for innovation and personalized products has increased reliance on third parties. Third, I will cover the recently effective computer security notification rule, and how that rule can benefit regulators through notification of cyber incidents and banks in monitoring their third-party service providers. And finally, I will briefly address some of the Federal Reserve's recent actions related to cyber risk. Evolving Technologies and Their Associated RisksI'll begin with technology and the risks presented by the implementation and integration of new technologies. As the pace of technology innovations continue to accelerate, companies are engaging in business in new ways. New products and services present new risks. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen greater interest in customer adoption of digital banking products and utilization of remote work tools by bank employees, both of which have created new opportunities for cyberattacks. Some of these risks are best addressed directly by the bank with assistance from law enforcement, if necessary. Other risks may best be addressed by service providers. RansomwareOne of these risks is from ransomware, which continues to be an prevalent threat to financial institutions. Reports of these kinds of attacks have increased significantly over the past five years, with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) reporting more than 1,400 ransomware-related Bank Secrecy Act filings in 2021, worth nearly $1.2 billion. This represents a nearly 200 percent increase over 2020 and coincides with elevated geopolitical risk. Moreover, the frequency of ransomware attacks has escalated due to the emergence of ransomware-as-a-service, enabling easier deployment of these types of attacks. Although ransomware impacts financial institutions of all sizes, it disproportionately impacts smaller banks that may not have sufficient resources to protect against these attacks.2 Ransomware is often delivered through phishing emails or through the unauthorized installation of malicious programs onto an organization's systems, known as "drive-by-downloads." These tactics take advantage of those with access to a bank's internal systems, whose actions, while perhaps well-intentioned, enable the ransomware cyberattack to occur. According to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, eight out of 10 organizations had at least one user fall for a phishing attempt, and one out of 10 phishing emails resulted in a user opening a malicious attachment or accessing a malicious internet link.3Banks regularly perform exercises testing employee vulnerability to these kinds of targeted attacks. Banks should continue efforts to educate those with systems access about these risks. Ransomware attacks can be mitigated by bank management. By using a robust, formal risk assessment process, bank management can develop a comprehensive action plan to prevent a ransomware attack from occurring, or to reduce the impact on the bank should such an attack occur. Banks that have planned ahead for a ransomware attack will be better positioned to respond when an attack occurs. Use of Internal and External ApplicationsSoftware and public-facing applications are also potential targets for exploitation, requiring effective planning and implementation of patch management to address emerging and existing vulnerabilities. Hackers constantly seek opportunities to exploit software holes and risks exist even with a bank's best efforts to install the most up-to-date security patches. For example, often when vulnerabilities are identified, providers have not yet provided patches to address these issues, leaving the bank vulnerable to what is referred to as zero-day exploits. Supply chain attacks, like the SolarWinds incident, occur when a bad actor compromises software, or software updates, before the vendor can provide it to customers for installation. While there are some mechanisms to mitigate the risk of these attacks, defenses are limited because organizations rarely control their entire software supply chain.4 This is an example of a threat that a bank on its own may not be best equipped to address. Therefore, regulators should carefully consider the appropriate entity for the focus of regulatory attention. Third-Party Risk ManagementCustomer demand for innovative and personalized products and services has increased community banks' reliance on third-party relationships to enable them to provide new technologies. These relationships position small banks to remain competitive and demonstrate their commitment to serving the needs of their customers and communities. At the same time, greater reliance on third parties could create additional opportunity for cyber criminals. The federal banking agencies recognize the increasing role third parties play in providing banks with a multitude of services including access to new technologies, human capital, delivery channels, products, services, and markets. In July 2021, in recognition of this trend, together the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency jointly released proposed interagency guidance for the risk management of third-party relationships. Although each of these federal banking agencies had already published separate third-party risk management guidance, the intent of the additional proposed guidance is to create consistency across the regulatory agencies and to consider whether further risks should be considered, given the evolving nature of the industry.5The banking agencies are currently in the process of considering the comments received on that proposal. A bank's use of third parties does not diminish its responsibility to oversee those activities in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including consumer laws. To assist banks in their oversight of third parties in implementing risk management programs, in 2021 the Federal Reserve began providing state member banks with reports relevant to their third-party partners. These reports contain information that may provide helpful insight in assessing the performance of bank service providers, depending on the services used and the risk the services pose. As a former banker, I see this as a valuable resource; having access to these supervisory reports helps to ensure that banks are receiving the information necessary to most effectively manage exposure to the risks posed by their service providers. In August 2021, the agencies also released a guide for community banks titled "Conducting Due Diligence on Financial Technology Firms." This guide was drawn from existing guidance, and, while voluntary, it is intended to be a helpful resource for community banks when performing due diligence on prospective relationships with fintech companies.6 The third-party service provider landscape has continued to evolve and expand. As a result, we should consider the appropriateness of shifting the regulatory burden from community banks to more efficiently focus directly on service providers. The Bank Service Company Act gives the federal banking agencies significant regulatory authority over outsourced banking services. In a world where third parties are providing far more of these services, it seems to me that these providers should bear more responsibility to ensure the outsourced activities are performed in a safe and sound manner. The computer security notification rule is one example that makes appropriate use of this authority. Computer Security Notification RuleGiven the escalating frequency and severity of cyberattacks, the agencies published a final rule in late 2021 establishing computer-security incident notification requirements for banks and, importantly, also for their service providers. The rule requires a bank to notify its primary federal regulator as soon as possible but no later than 36 hours after the bank determines that an incident requiring notification has occurred. An incident requiring notification is defined as a computer-security incident that disrupts or degrades, or is reasonably likely to disrupt or degrade, the viability of the banking organization's operations, resulting in customers being unable to access their deposits and other accounts, or impacting the stability of the financial sector. In addition, this rule requires a bank service provider to notify a bank-designated point of contact at each affected customer bank. The notification must occur as soon as possible after the service provider determines that a computer-security incident has occurred that materially disrupted or degraded, or is reasonably likely to disrupt or degrade, covered services provided to the bank for four or more hours. Since community banks are largely reliant on bank service providers, the notification requirement is meant to assist in the process of a bank's assessment of the severity of the incident, including the breadth and depth of impact and the necessity to implement internal response protocols. This rule is also a good example of efficient regulation, since bank service providers are often best positioned to identify computer-security incidents. Since May 2022, banks and bank service providers have been required to comply with the computer-security incident notification rule. The Federal Reserve continues to expect banks to report breaches of sensitive customer information consistent with applicable law.7The new service provider reporting requirement together with the Fed's efforts to improve access to service provider reports should help to streamline small banks' efforts to monitor their technology service providers. The Federal Reserve System Focus on Cyber RiskThe financial system is deeply interconnected. As a result, the Federal Reserve coordinates with industry and a number of domestic and international agencies, governance bodies, and state and federal regulators to share information and best practices to prevent, detect, and recover from cyberattacks. These efforts enable the Federal Reserve to work closely with other regulatory agencies to issue consistent guidance and updated examination procedures on critical areas including IT risk management and cybersecurity. Of course, a critical element of the Fed's focus on cybersecurity risk is the expectation that a bank will continue to develop internal expertise and build upon that expertise over time. Similarly, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that our supervision is well positioned with appropriate staffing, training, and resources to understand and effectively examine cyber risk. We recognize that expertise in this area is critical for our success as well, and the Reserve Banks have been actively recruiting seasoned cybersecurity and IT specialists, while also working to develop in-house expertise. Examiner training is frequently updated to align with current and emerging threats, and the Federal Reserve actively prepares examiners when new cyber risk management guidance is released. IT examiners also get industry perspective through participating in external conferences and training events from cybersecurity experts and organizations. In short, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that examiners are well-positioned to supervise the efforts of state member banks and bank holding companies to address cyber-risks, and to provide more effective outreach and communication.8Today's workshop is just one of the many ways we engage with banks on cyber-related issues. Because cyber threats evolve quickly, cybersecurity must be equally dynamic in its response. Banks must continuously refine their risk management processes. We recognize the importance of regular communication and outreach through events like this one today. While we expect banks to be in touch with us when an event happens, cyber events should not be the first time a cyber-risk conversation occurs between a bank and its regulator. We look forward to working with you to assist in clarifying expectations, applying regulatory guidance or seeking feedback on cyber-risk management strategies. We encourage bank management teams to engage with regulatory points of contact whenever questions arise on cyber security matters just as with any other regulatory matter. Closing RemarksIn closing, the pace of technological change continues to accelerate. We recognize that banks need to adopt new technologies to meet customer demands, to take advantage of efficiencies and cost savings, and to remain competitive in the marketplace. Although third-party relationships are one avenue for community banks to bring new technologies online, they must do so with a thorough understanding of the associated risks. The Federal Reserve is committed to working together with the other regulators to continue providing guidance and resources, like this workshop, to ensure that banks are appropriately managing cyber risk. Thank you again for the invitation be with you today. I hope this workshop demonstrates the value of open communication between bankers, regulators, industry, and law enforcement so that we may continue to work together in building resilience in the financial system to ever-evolving cyber risks. 1. The views expressed in these remarks are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Cybersecurity and Financial System Resilience Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, July 2022).Return to text 3. See"Phishing," (PDF)Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.Return to text 4. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,Risk Review(PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, June 2022).Return to text 5. See Proposed Interagency Guidance on Third-Party Relationships: Risk Management, 86 Fed. Reg. 38182 (July 19, 2021).Return to text 6. See"SR 21-15 / CA 21-11: Guide for Community Banking Organizations Conducting Due Diligence on Financial Technology Companies,"Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last modified September 15, 2021.Return to text 7. See Computer-Security Incident Notification Requirements for Banking Organizations and Their Bank Service Providers, 86 Fed. Reg. 66424 (effective April 1, 2022).Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Cybersecurity and Financial System.Return to text