Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Fed Listens Event hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Odessa, Texas Thank you, Lorie, it is great to be here, and to hear the broad range of perspectives that are represented here today. In 2019, during a very different time in our history, the Federal Reserve began a year of listening sessions with the public, tied to changes being considered in our approach to monetary policy, which was: how the Federal Open Market Committee uses interest rates and other tools to promote a healthy economy. While data can tell us a lot, hearing the stories behind that data helps to paint a picture that brings it to life for me and for my colleagues. We have heard a lot about how Americans are faring in the economy, and about how they are affected by our policy decisions. And so, our effort to create opportunities to enhance our ability to listen has continued, and has become what I expect will be, and certainly should be, a permanent feature of the Federal Reserve's decision-making. It is a simple fact that what the Fed does in Washington has a significant impact on how families and businesses spend, borrow and plan for the future. That is exactly why we need to learn about the experiences of people in Odessa, Midland and other communities in the Permian Basin. Lately, as you know, the Fed has been focused on lowering inflation, which is essential if we want to support a growing economy and rising incomes. We want to hear how inflation, along with the higher interest rates needed to bring inflation down, is affecting you and your communities. These conversations provide important context to the economic data that we consider, and they help guide our thinking about how we can best achieve stability and support for the economic well-being of all Americans. One of the important issues we will talk about today is workforce development, which in every community depends on effective partnerships with the private sector. For many years, this region has been challenged to find qualified workers in certain industries. But now, the challenge of finding willing and qualified workers stretches far beyond just those requiring specific skills training. Our strong labor market has made it extremely difficult for growing businesses to find workers, which, if not addressed, could eventually undermine a strong economy. I am very interested to learn about the different strategies and approaches being used in this region to provide workers with the skills they need to fill these jobs, and what additional considerations might be helpful in your efforts to improve workforce development. Another issue we will focus on today is education. As a mother of two middle school students during the depths of the pandemic, I am particularly interested in understanding how your communities have managed and continue to manage Kindergarten through 12th grade education after the disruptions many places experienced as a result of the pandemic school closures. Student performance suffers during even brief periods of instruction disruption. So even in places where school closures may have been limited, there may continue to be lasting effects on attendance and student performance. Where schools were permitted to remain open, we know that teacher and support staff shortages were, and continue to be, a significant challenge for many school districts. I look forward to hearing your views and experiences during our time together. Thank you, again, for the invitation to be here today, and I look forward to our discussions.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Georgetown University McDonough School of Business Psaros Center for Financial Markets and Policy, Washington, DC It is a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the evolving money and payments landscape in the United States, which is a topic of primary importance to the Federal Reserve. Technological innovation has changed this landscape in recent years, as we have seen the emergence of new financial services entrants offering payments services, new platforms designed to increase the speed of payments, clearing, and settlement, and new forms of digital money. Over the past several years, and as a direct result of these developments, we have seen a significant increase in attention on central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) from central banks around the world in addition to a great deal of international and domestic engagement on CBDC. A number of central banks have taken steps to begin exploring the potential uses of a CBDC in their home countries. A very small number have adopted a CBDC for their local jurisdictions. And of course, discussions of the purpose, design, and potential risks of a U.S. CBDC, and technical research about key design elements, continue here in the United States. While the Federal Reserve plays an important role in these ongoing discussions and technical research, the Fed would not implement a U.S. CBDC without the approval of Congress. In broad terms, a CBDC is simply a new form of digital liability of a central bank. Because it is issued by a central bank, CBDC is typically thought of as being denominated in the currency of that central bank. One could imagine a digital U.S. dollar, a digital euro, or a digital pound. Beyond this baseline definition though, "what is a CBDC" defies a simple definition. A CBDC built on distributed ledger technology offers a wide range of design and potential use options, as well as potential risks. This variability complicates any discussion of a CBDC simply because we may not be talking about the same thing. There are two threshold questions that a policymaker needs to ask before any decision to move forward with a CBDC. First, what problem is the policymaker trying to solve, and is a CBDC a potential solution? Second, what features and considerations--including unintended consequences--may a policymaker want to consider in deciding to design and adopt a CBDC? While it would be impossible for me to provide a comprehensive analysis of every issue surrounding CBDC, my goal today is to offer a perspective on these two threshold questions and to conclude with some thoughts about the imperative for future research on CBDCs and the potential future of CBDCs in the United States. What Problem Could a CBDC Solve?In my view, the fundamental question is: what problem could a CBDC solve? CBDC and the Payment SystemOne issue being examined is whether a CBDC or even broader forms of digital money could make the payment system more efficient. Do these new technologies present opportunities to increase the speed of payments and/or lower costs and frictions within the payment system? Of course, this question takes place in the context of the payments infrastructure in each jurisdiction, both for domestic payments and for cross-border payments. Many countries have launched faster payment systems and continue to investigate how central banks can support these payment systems. We have seen a wide range of motivations for this work, including addressing specific inefficiencies in the payment system, providing a CBDC if cash use were to decline, or promoting broader private-sector innovation for future generations of payments.1 Improving the speed of payments, particularly retail payments, can be accomplished without the introduction of a CBDC. In the United States, beginning later this year, the Federal Reserve's FedNowSMService will enable banks in the United States to offer their customers the ability to send and receive payments in real-time.2 Policymakers have also raised other arguments for why a CBDC may be suitable in their home countries. Some have argued that a CBDC would facilitate large-value transactions between financial institutions.3Others see CBDC as a vehicle to improve upon international payments. And still others view CBDCs as necessary to preserve the role of central bank money as a stabilizing force in the payments system and to safeguard monetary sovereignty,4or to ensure that digital money has a high degree of safety and uniformity to promote innovation and competition.5 CBDC and Financial InclusionAnother issue that some have raised is whether innovation in money and payments, including a potential U.S. CBDC, could improve financial inclusion. We can all agree that financial inclusion is an important goal when considering improvements in access to financial services, banking, and the payment system. However, in the United States today, over 95 percent of households have a least one member of the household with a banking relationship holding a checking or savings account.6Of the remaining 4.5 percent who are not banked, nearly three-quarters have no interest in having a bank account, and approximately one-third cited a lack of trust in banks as the reason for not having a bank account. I think it is unlikely that this group would find the government somehow more trustworthy than highly regulated banks. Unbanked households are also less likely to own mobile phones or have access to the internet, which would present barriers to CBDC adoption. While there has been important research on these barriers to adoption, including consumer attitudes and technology requirements, policymakers also need to consider whether there are other means to improve financial inclusion, such as alternatives for making the distribution of government benefits more efficient and effective like promoting financial literacy.7 CBDC for Implementation of Policy ObjectivesAnother issue is whether the government should use new technologies, including a potential CBDC, to accomplish a variety of policy objectives beyond those directly related to the operating of an efficient and safe financial system. Imagine a scenario in which fiscal spending, in the form of government benefits or payments, could be transferred via CBDC and could include a limited timeframe in which they could be spent before expiring. Enabling this type of limit through a CBDC would stand in stark contrast to the flexibility and freedom embedded in physical currency or bank deposits and could serve to control or even harm consumers and businesses. There is also a risk that this type of control could lead to the politicization of the payments system and at its heart, how money is used. A CBDC that permitted this type of control not only has the potential to allow the government to limit certain types of private spending or limit access to banking accounts, it could also threaten the Federal Reserve's independence. The Efficiency and Speed of the Payments SystemCBDCs are often discussed in the context of providing fast or instant payments for a variety of transactions, whether consumer-to-business or person-to-person transactions. As I previously noted, the introduction of the FedNow Service in the United States and other instant payments platforms globally leads me to ask: What could a CBDC accomplish, if anything, over and above what instant payments platforms alone can accomplish? There are potential use cases in the context of certain interbank transactions in wholesale markets, where some transactions are slow and heavily resource-intensive to clear and settle. Participants in the wholesale financial markets have been considering innovative ways to address these frictions with newer technologies such as distributed ledger technology in which shared information across counterparties could be leveraged to increase speed and reduce back-office costs to reconcile transactions before they settle. In the public debate about CBDC, some have argued that the introduction of a wholesale version of a CBDC could fully unlock the benefits of these newer technologies for these financial market use cases. Similar to the questions noted for a retail level CBDC, policymakers must carefully consider the wholesale use cases, including whether there is added value of a wholesale version of CBDC in supporting new infrastructure to financial transactions over and above existing methods. Cross-Border ActivitiesIn the international context, frictions and high costs are pain points often associated with cross-border payments. Many policymakers have discussed whether CBDCs could play a role in streamlining cross-border payments by using new technologies, introducing simplified distribution channels, and creating additional opportunities for cross-jurisdictional collaboration and interoperability. Of course, these opportunities may be limited by the regulatory and legal safeguards in place for payments between countries with different legal structures, including customer identification, customer due diligence, and sanctions screening for compliance with regulations and policies for Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering (BSA/AML). These competing priorities are challenging to reconcile. While cross-border payments are among the slowest and least efficient, they also raise substantial legal and regulatory compliance concerns that would apply equally to CBDCs. International Role of the U.S. DollarAnother consideration is whether a CBDC (or lack of it) would affect the role of the U.S. dollar in international trade.8In my view, the dollar serves this role because of the size of the U.S. economy, its deep and liquid financial markets, the strength of U.S. institutions, and its commitment to the rule of law. A CBDC, or lack of it, may not meaningfully change the existing incentives for people, firms, or countries to conduct business in the dollar. Therefore, maintenance of the dollar as a reserve global currency will require broad policies that foster economic growth, liquid markets, and an unwavering commitment to the rule of law. And we should have an imperative to research and experiment with new technological innovation. I will say more on that shortly. Declining Cash Use and CBDCIn jurisdictions that have not adopted a CBDC, cash is generally the only central bank money available to the public, and it remains an important and popular means of payment.9In some countries, however, digital payments have rapidly supplanted the use of cash. As a result of this trend, many central banks have cited the importance of access to central bank money by the general public as a potential reason to issue a CBDC. For example, Sir Jon Cunliffe of the United Kingdom examined the central role money plays in social and economic stability and concluded that, because private money has been replacing the use of government money over time, at some point "a retail, general purpose digital currency …will be needed in the U.K."10Because the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring the continued safety and availability of cash, a CBDC could be considered as a means toexpandsafe payment options, not to reduce or replace them. So, an important issue for us to consider would be whether a CBDC could provide the public with a more attractive alternative to cash in a world that may be shifting away from cash-based payments. In probing this question, we need to also consider the privacy implications, and whether a CBDC would be a better alternative than private-sector solutions. Stablecoins and CBDCSome new private forms of money, often referred to as stablecoins, have emerged mainly to support trading in the crypto-asset ecosystem both as a means of payment and as a store of value. These stablecoins, which purport to have convertibility one-for-one with the dollar, have also been discussed as an alternative to traditional payments. However, stablecoins are less secure, less stable, and less regulated than traditional forms of money. and their structures and frameworks are opaque. To the extent stablecoins become widely used in day-to-day payments, these features could raise significant concerns. Of course, issuing a CBDC has been discussed as a potential alternative to stablecoins that could address some of these shortcomings. It is also possible that Congress could pass legislation to strengthen the regulation and oversight of stablecoins to mitigate some of these issues. I will be following developments in Congress closely on this and other digital assets. Regardless, it is important for us to continue to evaluate the evolving landscape of digital assets and understand whether and how well-regulated stablecoins or a CBDC would interact with each other and with the broader payments system. Design Features and Policy ConsiderationsThe Fed's ongoing exploratory work helps us to think critically about a future shaped by innovations in payments and the broader economy, including instant payments and new potential forms of money and payment systems like CBDCs and other digital assets that could potentially play a larger role in the economy. While the investigation of CBDC raises many policy questions, for the purposes of today's discussion I will focus on a few key areas that are important from my perspective. Privacy ConsiderationsAs we consider these potential opportunities for improvements and innovation, we must also note that the introduction of a CBDC could present significant risks, challenges, and tradeoffs. First, in my view safeguarding privacy is a top concern and is also often identified as a top concern of consumers and other stakeholders. As a baseline, we need to think about how to protect the privacy of consumers and businesses, while also establishing an appropriate level of transparency that would deter criminal activity. We must ensure that consumer data privacy protections embedded in today's payment systems continue and are extended into future systems. In thinking about the implications of CBDC and privacy, we must also consider the central role that money plays in our daily lives, and the risk that a CBDC would provide not only a window into, but potentially an impediment to, the freedom Americans enjoy in choosing how money and resources are used and invested. So, a central consideration must be how a potential U.S. CBDC could incorporate privacy considerations into its design, and what technology and policy options could support a robust privacy framework. The issue of privacy may be less difficult to address in the case of wholesale use cases, in which a CBDC would only be used by traditional financial institutions to conduct a limited range of financial market transactions. As with many of these considerations, the purpose and intended function of a CBDC has a major impact on its policy and design considerations. Interoperability and InnovationRelatedly, one possible way to design a CBDC could be to focus on providing a foundational layer on top of which banks and other eligible institutions could build their own technology. In such an intermediated model, banks and other eligible institutions would build technology on top of a CBDC that could be offered to retail consumers and others to provide products and services that may not be available today. It would be important to understand how such a layer would connect or interact with existing and new payments infrastructures. It is useful to consider what types of innovations this could encourage. Some of the research on the design and functionality of CBDCs contemplates things like increased programmability--allowing the efficient transfer of money through the use of so-called smart contracts--that could improve upon existing, regulated forms of money and payments. These are important questions worth exploring, but they link back to the identification of "problems" that a CBDC would be designed to solve. Unintended Effects on the U.S. Banking SystemIt is also necessary to consider the potential impacts of a CBDC on the banking sector. Today's banking system delivers important benefits to our economy and, as I noted earlier, is continuing to evolve through innovations, like the improved availability of instant payments already discussed. There are significant risks in adopting a CBDC that cannibalizes rather than complements the U.S. banking system. The U.S. banking system is a mature, well-functioning, effective and efficient system. Banks provide consumers access to credit and other banking and payments services. Banks also support important public policies, including reporting on suspicious or criminal activity through their BSA/AML compliance and reporting. More importantly, banks play an essential role in the transmission of monetary policy and supporting a well-functioning economy and financial system. If the Federal Reserve were to be authorized and directed to implement a U.S. CBDC, we would need to carefully consider how an intermediated CBDC, with private-sector service providers, could be designed in a way that maintains financial institution involvement and minimizes disruptions to the financial system. A CBDC, if not properly designed, could disrupt the banking system and lead to disintermediation, potentially harming consumers and businesses, and could present broader financial stability risks.11Consider the consequences of a CBDC that pays interest at comparable or better rates than commercial bank deposits and other low-risk assets. It seems likely that such a CBDC would reduce the funds available to lend and increase the cost of capital across the economy. Likewise, we need to consider the effect on bank stability, and the potential of even more rapid bank runs, in a world where there are fewer constraints on the volume and velocity of payments. The ongoing demand for private and public options to facilitate instant payments may exacerbate these concerns. These are exactly the types of issues that policymakers must confront. It would be irresponsible to undermine the traditional banking system by introducing a CBDC without appropriate guardrails to mitigate these potential impacts on the banking sector and the financial system. The Imperative of Continuing ResearchThe Federal Reserve's work continues to explore an array of CBDC design choices and the challenging consideration of policy tradeoffs that this multitude of choices presents. It is imperative that each of these tradeoffs is carefully evaluated and thoroughly understood. Where opportunities for improvements may exist, we should ask whether a U.S. CBDC is the most efficient and effective means to make such improvements, or are there better alternatives, such as enhancements to current payment infrastructures? Apart from focusing on payments alone, it is also worth considering whether other policies would more effectively target financial inclusion, including policies that are beyond the remit of the Federal Reserve. And in the absence of a CBDC, some of these risks I noted may still exist as the private sector continues to innovate, including the risk of substitution from commercial bank deposits to digital wallets, and the migration to less regulated digital assets, including stablecoins. With such significant potential opportunities, risks, and tradeoffs, it is essential that the Federal Reserve continue to thoroughly research and engage with stakeholders to further understand these issues. Future decisions about the implementation of technology innovations in money and payments, including a potential U.S. CBDC, must be informed by a deep and thorough understanding of potential intended and unintended consequences, as well as understanding whether a CBDC would be the most effective and efficient means to improve the payment system and address identified problems. The Federal Reserve has continued its independent research and technical experimentation on digital innovations, including digital assets and CBDC. Specific to CBDC, the Federal Reserve established a program of work that aims to (1) carry out policy analysis to provide perspectives on issues articulated in the Board's January 2022 discussion paper; (2) conduct technology research and experimentation to inform potential CBDC designs; and (3) invest in engagement with the public, industry, academia, and the public sector to bring along stakeholders and obtain needed expertise. Concluding Thoughts: The Potential Future of CBDC in the United StatesOf course, as the evolution of money and payments continues, it is important for the Federal Reserve to continue looking ahead to anticipate potential changes to money and payments well into the future. With this in mind, our consideration of other potential innovations to money and payments, including a potential U.S. CBDC, must be viewed through the lens of whether and how the payment system would be improved beyond what instant payment services will achieve. We should ask "what current frictions exist or may emerge in the payment system thatonlya CBDC can solve, or that a CBDC can solvemost efficiently?" In my view, it is important that the Federal Reserve is a part of the ongoing conversations around CBDCs, whether or not a CBDC is ultimately created in the United States. As the Federal Reserve continues to monitor developments in other jurisdictions, we will work closely with international counterparts on payments innovation, CBDC, and other related topics. This includes work with multilateral institutions such as the Bank for International Settlements, the G7, and the Financial Stability Board, as well as bilateral engagements with other central banks. From my perspective, there could be some promise for wholesale CBDCs in the future for settlement of certain financial market transactions and processing international payments. When it comes to some of the broader design and policy issues, particularly those around consumer privacy and impacts on the banking system, it is difficult to imagine a world where the tradeoffs between benefits and unintended consequences could justify a direct access CBDC for uses beyond interbank and wholesale transactions. It is important that we thoughtfully examine the evolving money and payments landscape and digital innovations broadly, including a potential U.S. CBDC. In addition to understanding international approaches to these issues, the Federal Reserve's research, experimentation, and outreach to stakeholders help us to gain important input and perspective on these issues. Apart from these ongoing CBDC-related efforts, the Federal Reserve is committed to the successful implementation of FedNow, which is expected to support the broader adoption of instant payments in the U.S., meaningfully evolving and upgrading the U.S. payments infrastructure for consumers and businesses. Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts on these important issues. 1. For example, The Bank of England and HM Treasury have stated that they judge that it is likely a digital pound will be needed in the future and that further preparatory work is justified. See Bank of England and HM Treasury,The Digital Pound: A New Form of Money for Households and Businesses? (PDF)Consultation Paper (London: Bank of England, February 2023). However, the UK parliament has previously expressed skepticism. See House of Lords, UK Parliament,Central Bank Digital Currencies: A Solution in Search of a Problem?,HL Paper 131, (London: House of Lords, UK Parliament, January 2022). Similarly, a government-appointed report in Sweden did not find a current need for a CBDC, though the Riksbank continues to investigate how an e-krona could work if a decision is taken in the future to issue digital central bank money. See Centralbanking.com, "Sweden Does Not Yet Need CBDC, Inquiry Finds," web article, https://www.centralbanking.com/fintech/cbdc/7957236/sweden-does-not-yet-need-cbdc-inquiry-finds and Sveriges Riksbank,E-krona Pilot Phase 3(Sweden: Riksbank, April 2023).Return to text 2. FedNow is expected to be available to financial institutions in July that are early adopters and have completed a program for customer certification and testing. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Announces July Launch for the FedNow Service," news release, March 15, 2023.Return to text 3. Agustín Carstens, general manager of the Bank for International Settlements has discussed the idea of a "unified ledger" run by the central bank to fully realize the potential of new technologies developed by the private sector. See Agustín Carstens, "Innovation and the Future of the Monetary System," speech at the Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, February 22, 2023.Return to text 4. Fabio Panetta, "Central Bank Digital Currencies: Defining the Problems, Designing the Solutions (PDF)," speech at U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 18, 2022.Return to text 5. Jon Cunliffe, "The Digital Pound," speech at UK Finance, February 7, 2023.Return to text 6.2021 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF).Return to text 7. For additional discussion on CBDC design and financial inclusion, see Maniff, Jesse Leigh, "Inclusion by Design: Crafting a Central Bank Digital Currency to Reach All Americans"Return to text 8. See Christopher J. Waller, "The U.S. Dollar and Central Bank Digital Currencies," speech at Digital Currencies and National Security Tradeoffs, a symposium presented by the Harvard National Security Journal, Cambridge, Massachusetts, October 14, 2022. ("I don't think there are implications …[on the adoption of a U.S. CBDC] for the role of the United States in the global economy and financial system.")Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, January 2022).Return to text 10. Jon Cunliffe, "The Digital Pound."Return to text 11. For discussion on CBDC implications for bank funding, lending, and resilience, see Bank for International Settlements, "Central Bank Digital Currencies: Financial Stability Implications (PDF)(Basel: BIS, September 2021);and Sebastian Infante, Kyungmin Kim, Anna Orlik, André F. Silva, and Robert J. Tetlow, "The Macrcoeconomic Implications of CBDC: A Review of the Literature," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 2022).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday that it is accepting applications from individuals who wish to be considered for membership on the Community Advisory Council, or CAC, which advises the Board on issues affecting consumers and communities. The CAC is made up of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer and community development organizations and interests, including affordable housing, community and workforce development, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members meet semiannually with members of the Board of Governors in Washington to provide a range of perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income consumers and communities. The CAC is one of several advisory councils that the Board draws upon for firsthand insight from key stakeholders. The Board expects to announce the appointment of CAC members later this year. Applicants from previous years may re-apply. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions for submitting an application, is availablehere. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Solicitation of Applications for Membership on the Community Advisory Council
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval for UBS Group AG, of Zürich, Switzerland, to acquire the U.S. subsidiaries of Credit Suisse Group AG, of Zürich, Switzerland. The application was submitted in connection with UBS Group AG's acquisition of Credit Suisse Group AG. In connection with the proposal, UBS has committed to provide the Board with an implementation plan for combining the U.S. business and operations of UBS and Credit Suisse, which will be updated quarterly. The implementation plan will address UBS's obligations to comply with more stringent enhanced prudential standards, including liquidity standards. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Orient Bancorporation, San Francisco, California, and Bank of the Orient, San Francisco, CaliforniaWritten Agreement dated March 18, 2021 (PDF)Terminated April 20, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that the review of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, led by Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr, will be released on Friday, April 28, at 11:00 a.m. ET. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the results from the review of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, led by Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr. The review finds four key takeaways on the causes of the bank's failure: "Following Silicon Valley Bank's failure, we must strengthen the Federal Reserve's supervision and regulation based on what we have learned," said Vice Chair for Supervision Barr. "This review represents a first step in that process—a self-assessment that takes an unflinching look at the conditions that led to the bank's failure, including the role of Federal Reserve supervision and regulation." The report discusses in detail the management of the bank and the supervisory and regulatory issues surrounding the failure of the bank. It goes through the recent supervisory history of Silicon Valley Bank and includes more than two dozen documents containing the bank's confidential supervisory information such as supervisory letters, examination results, and supervisory warnings. "I welcome this thorough and self-critical report on Federal Reserve supervision from Vice Chair Barr," Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell said. "I agree with and support his recommendations to address our rules and supervisory practices, and I am confident they will lead to a stronger and more resilient banking system." The report and documents detail the bank's rapid growth, as well as the challenges Federal Reserve supervisors faced in identifying the bank's vulnerabilities and forcing the bank to fix them. At the time of its failure, the bank had 31 unaddressed safe and soundness supervisory warnings—triple the average number of peer banks. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank|PDF Silicon Valley Bank Review – Supervisory Materials Understanding Federal Reserve Supervision
The Federal Reserve on Friday issued initial findings from its 2022 triennial payments study. The information shows how consumers and businesses chose to make noncash payments, using checks, different types of cards, and the automated clearinghouse (ACH). Additional details will be available as analysis is completed. The data show that the average values of consumers' and businesses' ACH, check, and card payments increased substantially from 2018 to 2021. The data also show that consumers and businesses made more noncash payments, leading to a greater total value of noncash payments in the same time period. Cards were used most frequently, and accounted for 84 percent of the increase in the number of payment transactions. The increase in total value, however, was driven almost entirely by the increase in the value of ACH payments. The Federal Reserve Payments Studyis a collaborative effort of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Federal Reserve Board. The triennial study has been conducted every three years since 2001 with annual supplements since 2017. The study develops aggregate estimates using data collected from voluntary surveys of depository institutions, card networks, and other major payment processors. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Note:On April 21, 2023, the press release was updated to correct the number for card payments’ contribution to the increase in the number of payment transactions from 98 to 84.
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Graybar National Training Conference, San Antonio, Texas Thank you, Kathy, it's a pleasure to be with you today. I am going to focus my remarks on the economic outlook, including how the recent turmoil in banking has affected that outlook.1Relative to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) economic objectives, data for the first quarter indicate that economic output and employment are continuing to grow at a solid pace while inflation remains much too high. The FOMC raised its target range for the federal funds rate to 4-3/4 to 5 percent at its March meeting, and our statement noted that recent banking developments are likely to result in tighter credit conditions and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. We didn't know then, and still don't know, the extent of these possible effects. So, perhaps even more closely than usual, I will be watching the data to evaluate the appropriate path of monetary policy. The sudden failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and Signature Bank, which contributed to stresses felt by other mid-size banks, was a classic bank run, in which the rapid withdrawal of funds by depositors created severe liquidity problems. SVB was a specialty bank serving the tech sector. Unlike other banks, where a substantial share of deposits is insured and verifiably safe, more than 90 percent of SVB's deposits were above the $250,000-per-account limit for deposit insurance. Additionally, those deposits were largely from many of the same types of businesses, resulting in additional risk. Chair Powell has directed Vice Chair for Supervision Barr to report by May 1 on SVB's failure, including the Federal Reserve's supervision and regulation of the bank. Based on what is already in the public record, SVB seems to have done a terrible job managing its risks. A bank run that undermines confidence in other banks is the most fundamental risk to the financial system, and the Fed, serving as the lender of last resort, was created in part to prevent such a development. The job of the lender of last resort is to provide sufficient funds to the banking system so that depositors can be confident they will be able to withdraw their funds on demand. If depositors are confident that they will be able to withdraw their funds, then a bank run will stop or never start in the first place. Last month, that confidence was fractured when the failures of SVB and Signature Bank raised the possibility that uninsured depositors could take significant losses. As fear of taking those losses spread to uninsured depositors at healthy institutions, it became imperative for the Federal Reserve, along with other regulators, to act. The Fed's long-time liquidity tool is the discount window, by which banks can post collateral, priced at market value, and obtain loans for up to 90 days. On March 12, the Fed created an additional lending tool, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, called the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP), which accepts U.S. government securities collateral at par value with no haircuts for loans with maturities up to a year. To date, both tools are working well at providing needed liquidity to help banks deal with deposit outflows. In addition, the Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Treasury Department announced the use of the systemic risk exception with respect to both SVB and Signature Bank to fully protect all depositors. I voted for these actions, not because SVB and Signature are systemically important on their own, but to stem the emerging crisis of confidence which could have led to additional bank runs with significant adverse effects on financial markets and the broader economy. The BTFP and discount window appear to have been successful in providing stability to the banking system. In the past few weeks, we have seen deposit flows stabilize across banks and, as a result, the combined usage of the discount window and the new program has moderated. Both tools remain ready and able to provide liquidity, enabling banks to support households and businesses. This success allowed us to focus on our macroeconomic objectives of price stability and maximum employment when setting the policy rate at our March FOMC meeting. Against this backdrop, the FOMC raised the policy rate 25 basis points without causing significant stress to the financial system. To date, that decision has been validated. That said, it is unclear to what extent the stress in the banking system will weigh on economic activity. If banks feel they need to adjust their business models or are uncertain about the stability of their deposit base or the momentum of the economy, they may tighten credit conditions and curtail lending. Tighter financial conditions or other lending conditions would likely cause households to reduce spending and businesses to pull back on investment and hiring, all of which will help move supply and demand back into better balance and help bring inflation down toward our 2 percent target. It is important to note that there were indications of tightening credit conditions this year before the problems emerged in the banking system. In the Board's January senior loan officer opinion survey, bank officials reported higher interest rates for loans and tighter lending standards, relative to the end of last year.2These loan officers also said they expected to continue tightening lending standards over the course of 2023. They cited an expected deterioration in collateral value, a reduction in risk tolerance, and a deterioration in the credit quality of bank portfolios, which mirror the factors that contributed to the recent turmoil in banking. The failure of SVB and Signature Bank and related developments might have solidified and pulled forward factors that were already working to tighten lending conditions, or it may be that credit conditions will now be even tighter than they were on track to be. I say this because, all else equal, a significant tightening of credit conditions could obviate the need for some additional monetary policy tightening, but making such a judgement is difficult, especially in real time.3 Regarding the economic outlook, the data in hand for the first quarter of 2023 continue to surprise me, with stronger growth and job creation than I expected late last year. The FOMC has significantly raised the target range for the federal funds rate to dampen aggregate demand, but U.S. consumers and businesses are showing remarkable resilience. The Atlanta Fed's gross domestic product (GDP) growth tracker, which reflects the most up-to-date data, estimates that gross domestic product grew by 2.2 percent in the first quarter, in line with many private sector estimates and higher than most estimates of potential growth provided by FOMC participants. This growth would mean that, so far, tighter monetary policy and credit conditions are not doing much to restrain aggregate demand. Some data for March point to moderation in economic activity. The Institute for Supply Management's (ISM) survey of purchasing managers indicated that manufacturing contracted in March, and the ISM's survey related to non-manufacturing indicated that activity outside the manufacturing sector decelerated in March to a modest pace. Just a few minutes ago data on retail sales for March was released, which will give us some idea of how consumer demand is holding up. For this and other sectors of the economy, I believe that demand will moderate because of higher interest rates. The solid performance of the economy through the first quarter in part reflects the tight labor market. The jobs report for March showed, once again, that we have a strong labor market, with 236,000 jobs created and the unemployment rate falling to 3.5 percent. While still showing strong signs of growth, job creation did cool a bit from the hot readings we got in January and February. And we did get some encouraging news that the labor market is rebalancing. First, the labor participation rate increased for the fourth month in a row, so labor supply is slowly increasing. Second, the report on February job openings showed that job vacancies fell 632,000 to 9.9 million and the vacancy rate declined to 6 percent. Job vacancies have fallen 14 percent since the peak in March 2022. The job openings data along with the jobs report show that labor demand has been falling, which is more evident in declining vacancies than in rising layoffs. So as the labor market continues to rebalance this should help bring inflation down by reducing wage pressures. Now, let's talk about what these developments mean for inflation. Inflation moderated in the second half of 2022, but that progress more or less stalled toward the end of the year, and inflation remains far above the FOMC's target of 2 percent. On April 12, we got consumer price index (CPI) inflation data for March, and it was another month of mixed news. Overall CPI inflation rose very little with only a 0.05 percent increase from the previous month, due to sharp declines in food and energy prices, with the year over year increase falling to 5 percent. Core inflation, which strips out food and energy prices, is a good guide to future inflation, and that measure came in at around 0.4 percent in March, which translates to an annual rate of 4.6 percent if it were to persist. It was the fourth month in a row with core inflation at 0.4 percent or higher. Since December of 2021, core inflation has basically moved sideways with no apparent downward movement. So, despite some encouraging news on a slowing in housing costs, core inflation does not show much improvement and remains far above our 2 percent inflation target. Whether you measure inflation using the CPI or the Fed's preferred measure of personal consumption expenditures, it is still much too high and so my job is not done. I interpret these data as indicating that we haven't made much progress on our inflation goal, which leaves me at about the same place on the economic outlook that I was at the last FOMC meeting, and on the same path for monetary policy. Because financial conditions have not significantly tightened, the labor market continues to be strong and quite tight, and inflation is far above target, so monetary policy needs to be tightened further. How much further will depend on incoming data on inflation, the real economy, and the extent of tightening credit conditions. Another implication from my outlook and the slow progress lately is that, as of now, monetary policy will need to remain tight for a substantial period of time, and longer than markets anticipate. But there are still more than two weeks until the next FOMC meeting, and I stand ready to adjust my stance based on what we learn about the economy, including about lending conditions. Other data such as those on the housing sector, personal income, and surveys that provide managers' views of economic conditions in April will come in over the next few weeks. I would welcome signs of moderating demand, but until they appear and I see inflation moving meaningfully and persistently down toward our 2 percent target, I believe there is still work to do. Thank you, Kathy, and I'm happy to take a few questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. One can find the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices at the following link.https://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos.htm.Return to text 3. For a given level of tightening in various financial market data, estimates of the equivalence in tightening of the policy rate vary widely, and, as the shift in financial conditions since early March showed, financial conditions themselves are a moving target.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Carroll Round Keynote Speech, Georgetown University McDonough School of Business, Washington, D.C. Good evening. Thank you for the invitation to speak at the Carroll Round this year.1 Economics, like any other discipline, has its own established canon and set of rules and models. But it is also constantly evolving, growing, and changing shape. New approaches and methods are developed. Unique forces arise and long-established behaviors can change--as we have seen over the past three years, and even the past decade. There will always be unasked questions and new trails to blaze. And, as in any field, the people who make up the profession lie at the heart of its growth and progress. It is a pleasure to be here today among such a talented group of future economists. Your research reflects everything that is exciting about the discipline. Because you have interesting theses. Because you have used an impressive variety of data sets and models. And because you have a perspective that is unique to your generation and experiences. As you know, I was a professor of economics and international relations at Michigan State University for nearly two decades before joining the Board of Governors. Among my favorite courses to teach were undergraduate research courses. It was magical to see the novel ways that students brought new ideas, literature, models, methods, and data to the most pressing problems of the day. I see some of that magic in the research represented here this evening. In keeping with that spirit of inquiry, I would like to talk today about some of the open questions I see for understanding the economic outlook and for setting monetary policy. I will also focus on some of the data sources I find valuable for answering those questions. InflationFor monetary policy, the foremost questions currently are about the inflation process. The pandemic-related economic shutdown created rapid shifts in demand, which continued through the reopening process and reflected people's wants and needs during that time. For instance, there was a sharp move away from in-person services and toward goods. This was coupled with disruptions to supply, both in global supply chains and the labor force. Russia's invasion of Ukraine last year further restricted access to commodities, and the subsequent surge in energy prices drove a spike in consumer price inflation to a peak in mid-2022, reaching levels not seen since the 1980s. As energy prices have moderated and supply disruptions have eased, inflation has followed suit and started to abate. Last week, data on the consumer price index (CPI) showed 12-month inflation falling to 5 percent in March from a peak of about 9 percent last June. The Fed has a preferred consumer price measure, which is the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index. It covers a broader set of goods and services than the CPI, and its weighting of individual prices can change each month to reflect consumer spending behavior. Last week's data suggest that PCE inflation likely will be somewhat above 4 percent in March, also significantly lower than last June. The big question, however, is whether, and how quickly, inflation will continue its downward path toward our target of 2 percent. Much of the decline so far has been driven by the moderation in energy prices, and there is evidence that the path back to our low and stable inflation goal could be long and is likely to be uneven and bumpy. Total (or headline) inflation tells us something critical about the effect on our daily lives--simply put, people need to eat, pay their bills, and get to work and school, among other things, and their budgets feel the impact. We also look at core inflation, which omits volatile food and energy prices and tends to give a more accurate signal of total inflation's trajectory. The rise and fall in core measures has been less dramatic than that of total inflation. We also look at other measures of underlying inflation, that try to get at the central tendency of inflation, such as median or trimmed-mean inflation. All of these measures have come off their peaks but remain elevated, suggesting that inflation has become broad based in the economy. Of course, economic data are generally backward looking. One question is whether timely data can give us a sense of where inflation is going. To this end, I have found several useful sources of data. For instance, to forecast core goods prices--which drove much of the initial surge in inflation--I look at various measures of supply chain disruptions and input prices. Those indicators helped predict the moderation in goods prices that emerged last fall. For automobiles, where shortages of semiconductors held down production and drove up prices for both new and used cars, I looked at wholesale used car prices as a leading indicator of retail prices. Those wholesale prices declined last fall but have turned up recently, suggesting that the moderation in goods prices may not be a smooth process. A big contributor to inflation over the past two years has been housing services prices (rent and a measure called owners' equivalent rent--essentially what a homeowner would pay if they had to rent their home). To help forecast this component, I have looked at rent increases on new leases, which slowed sharply over the past six months, as a leading indicator. These data come from sources that might be familiar to you, like Zillow, Apartments.com, and Apartment List. One encouraging development is that last week's CPI data showed a significant slowing in housing services inflation. This development likely reflects moderation in demand and has been helped by the additional supply of multifamily housing that is being completed. More places available to lease should contribute to easing rental prices. Finally, in forecasting inflation, especially for the broader category of core services ex. housing, a looming question is how the relationship between inflation and measures of economic slack--including in the labor market--will play out. This relationship has been challenged in recent years, particularly in terms of trying to explain the large movements in inflation since the pandemic. Labor MarketsThe labor market poses its own set of questions. To what extent has the labor market recovered from the 2020 downturn, and in what ways will it continue to differ from its pre-pandemic structure? With a range of data to consult, which indicators best capture the state of the jobs market? By many measures, the U.S. labor market is very strong. Payroll employment growth was robust in the first three months of this year, unemployment is near record lows, and job openings remain very high. A critical component of the labor market's fortitude is that it has extended its benefits to historically disadvantaged groups--those who have persistently seen gaps with their counterparts in other demographics, especially along racial lines. The African American unemployment rate historically has been about 4 to 5 percentage points above the overall unemployment rate, but that gap was cut in about half in 2019, following years of sustained expansion. After widening during the pandemic, that gap has once again narrowed, this time more quickly, and African American unemployment was at a record low of 5.0 percent in March. Similarly, workers in the lowest-income quartile have seen the strongest wage growth relative to other quartiles over the past two years. Those workers have benefitted from the availability of jobs and, in many cases, the ability to move to better, higher-paying jobs in the current strong labor market. Nonetheless, there are some signs that this strong labor market is softening at the margin. Wage growth has moderated somewhat from the rates reached about a year ago. Indicators of hiring have slowed. Job openings, while still elevated, have declined in recent months. And the quits rate has retraced more than half of its pandemic-era rise, falling from a 3 percent peak in late 2021 to 2.6 percent in February. That could be significant, as much of the surge in wage growth a year ago may have been driven by outsized wage gains of those changing jobs and by employers raising wages to retain existing workers. SupplyThe wage moderation may partly reflect some improvement in labor supply. One factor is that new estimates show higher population growth over the past year amid a rebound in immigration from its reduced levels during the pandemic. Labor force participation also has edged up to 62.5 percent in the most recent data. Prime-age participation (for workers aged 25 to 54) is now back to pre-pandemic levels. In our series ofFed Listensevents in 2019, when we talked with a wide range of people and community organizations, we heard that a strong labor market can pull in people from the sidelines who have skills that can be developed if given a chance. That appears to be happening now. The Fed cannot directly act to increase supply in the economy, but supply is a key input to our economic outlook. One important source of increased supply is productivity growth, which comes through both capital investment and innovation. My hope is that we will see increased innovation and productivity associated with the spurt of new businesses that have opened since the onset of the pandemic. Supply-side issues, especially innovation and productivity, have been a theme of my own academic research, including papers on patents and on the growth and funding of small businesses. So I am so pleased to see many of your topics touching on these issues, often using novel data sets from a wide range of countries. InternationalInternational issues are also an important area of research--and open questions--and have been another theme of my career. Much of the recent inflation episode was tied to international factors, including global supply chain disruptions and the surge in commodity prices. The continued war in Ukraine, China's economic reopening, and OPEC+ decisions on oil supply are some of the international forces that could affect the U.S. economy this year. We can also learn a lot from comparisons across economies with different economic structures and different policy responses to global shocks such as COVID. The importance of watching and learning from foreign economies has also been a central tenet of my career in economics. Economic forces and reverberations cannot be contained within regional or national borders. Even a giant like the U.S. economy does not operate alone. One of my top 10 pieces of advice for future economists is to study foreign economies (and languages, if you have the opportunity). I wrote my dissertation on the Russian banking system. It certainly taught me a lot about Russia and its economy specifically, and, given that I was there during the post-Soviet transition, it was an immersive experience of change. What I saw in Russia taught me that you could apply the same playbook that had seen near-uniform success but see it fail when the necessary foundation was lacking. In this case, the banking system model that worked here could not take hold in post-Soviet Russia, because it was missing trust and universal faith in the rule of law, which are critical to the functioning of financial institutions in market economies. A major lesson for me was that models help clarify our thinking, but any particular model is not always relevant for the given time, situation, or context. That experience was also possibly the best research training in the world. It is one thing to do your dissertation without the internet--it is another level to manually make your way through the records of the Kremlin's statistical agency! I will finish the "research abroad hard sell" by noting that nothing gives you quite the same clarity and perspective on a situation as seeing it through someone else's eyes. Immersing yourself in a new culture is reward in and of itself, but it will also teach you as much about your own world as it does about that of others. Monetary PolicyStepping back into the United States in 2023, what does the state of the economy mean for monetary policy? Relevant questions include, what are the channels through which policy tightening affects the economy? And what are the lags before the full effects are felt on the economy and on inflation? Since my first Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting last June, my approach has been one of data dependence. It has also taken into account risk management, which concedes that the Federal Reserve cannot eliminate risks but can manage them. This data-dependent, risk-management framework has led me to support the FOMC's response of rapid monetary policy tightening--we have raised interest rates 475 basis points in a year to bring inflation under control. Currently, with the federal funds rate target near 5 percent, I am looking at what rate will be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent, over time. I am weighing the implications of stronger momentum in the economy apparent in economic indicators over the past few months against potential headwinds from recent banking developments. If tighter financing conditions are a significant headwind on the economy, the appropriate path of the federal funds rate may be lower than it would be in their absence. But if data show continued strength in the economy and slower disinflation, we may have more work to do. In setting monetary policy, I continue to be guided by our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. I, like my colleagues on the FOMC, am committed to bringing inflation back to its 2 percent target over time, which will lay the foundation for sustainable strength in the labor market and the U.S. economy. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Cryptocurrency and the Future of Global Finance, Sarasota, Florida Thank you to the Global Interdependence Center for inviting me to speak today. While my remarks will touch on crypto-assets, they are focused more broadly on innovation and the future of finance.1 Innovation has been defined as "the introduction of novelties; the alteration of what is established by the introduction of new elements or forms."2This definition does not take a position on whether innovation is a good thing or a bad thing. To our modern ears, innovation generally has a positive connotation--it is something desirable that we want to foster. But it is important to remember that there is also a long tradition of viewing innovation with suspicion. This gets to a fundamental point: Innovation is a double-edged sword, with costs and benefits, and different effects on different groups of people. This is a lesson that we as financial regulators should bear in mind. Former Fed Chair Paul Volcker was a well-known critic of financial innovation, noting that, while credit default swaps and collateralized debt obligations may have helped some people hedge investment risks, they also played a key role in the Global Financial Crisis. He famously praised the automated teller machine as a beneficial bank innovation, but was skeptical about most other financial innovation.3As we think about crypto-assets, or other forms of innovation, we need to think carefully about which edge of the sword we are looking at: Will the innovation create new efficiencies, help mitigate risks, increase financial inclusion; or will it create new or exacerbate existing risks? Recently, I gave remarks on crypto-assets,4discussing how individuals can make their own choices about whether to invest in speculative assets, but I also said that banks and other intermediaries choosing to engage in crypto-asset-related activities must do so in a safe and sound manner. At the same time, the world is rapidly changing, and we need to be open to the potential benefits of innovation. In that light, I am focusing my remarks on two areas of innovation that may have the potential to deliver substantial benefits--tokenization and artificial intelligence, or AI. TokenizationLet's start with tokenization. As I discussed in my prior remarks on crypto-assets, I think of the crypto ecosystem as consisting of several parts, including the database management protocol used to record trades, commonly referred to as blockchain. A blockchain is ultimately a type of distributed database that can be used to record data, including asset ownership and transactions in the asset (i.e., changes in asset ownership).5To date, blockchain has primarily served as the ledger of record for crypto-assets, but it may be suitable to play a similar role for traditional assets, such as securities and derivatives. Before a blockchain can be used to facilitate transactions in traditional assets, the assets must first be "tokenized"--that is, represented on the blockchain such that the blockchain becomes the ledger of record for the asset. At that point, parties can engage in transactions with the tokenized asset by updating records on the blockchain. Why would a financial institution undertake this process to tokenize an asset? What advantages does blockchain offer relative to traditional approaches to conducting transactions? I do not intend to provide exhaustive answers to those questions here, but I do want to highlight several areas. First, blockchain can offer fast or even near-real time transfers on a 24/7/365 basis, which, among other things, allows parties precise control over settlement times and in some cases, can enhance efficiencies and reduce liquidity risks. I will note, of course, that these benefits are not unique to blockchains. The Federal Reserve's FedNow service, which is set to begin operations in July, does not rely on blockchain; and it will provide safe and efficient instant payment services in real time, around the clock, every day of the year. Another potential advantage of tokenized assets is that they are "programmable" and have "smart contract" functionality. A smart contract is a computer program stored on a blockchain, which can be programmed to execute predefined actions once certain conditions are met. When assets are tokenized, smart contracts can be used to constructandexecute transactions involving the asset. When the smart contract is activated, the transaction proceeds automatically as long as the specified conditions are met. This is the sense in which smart contracts are smart: they do not depend on the parties to the transaction to implement them; instead, they implement themselves, based on the terms specified by the parties. Smart contracts may allow for what is called "atomic settlement." Rather than relying on each party to separately carry out its leg of the transaction, smart contracts can effectively combine the two, or more, legs of the transaction into a single unified "atomic" act that is executed by the smart contract. This may be an additional robust way to achieve delivery-versus-payment ("DVP") and payment-versus-payment ("PVP") functionality, such that one leg of a transaction settles if and only if the other leg settles as well. Atomic settlement is useful because it can mitigate settlement and counterparty credit risks: it ensures that the buyer will not pay if the seller does not deliver; and conversely, that the seller will not deliver if the buyer does not pay. In fact, private sector institutions are testing use cases to better understand the benefits and risks of this technology. Firms have executed foreign-exchange trades using blockchain technology with smart contracts in an attempt to improve efficiencies. Separately, financial institutions have used blockchain to facilitate intraday repo transactions. Parties to these transactions may have more flexibility as to when the transactions settle, which in turn has the potential to create additional capital and liquidity efficiency. And blockchain's atomic settlement functionality may serve as another way to achieve an important risk mitigant: using repurchase agreements as an example, the repo "seller" can have confidence that it will receive the specified loan amount in exchange for the collateral it conveys; while the repo "buyer" knows it will receive the specified collateral. These efforts are still in early stages, but I expect that as functionality expands with more currencies, eligible securities, and new products, there will be more participation and growth. That isn't to say that there aren't risks associated with tokenization and the use of smart contracts: smart contracts can have bugs and potential cyber vulnerabilities; and instantaneous settlement raises its own set of risks. But there is considerable promise, and I look forward to seeing what private sector participants come up with to potentially enhance the way traditional transactions are conducted. Artificial IntelligenceThe second area I will discuss is artificial intelligence. Can you go anywhere without hearing about AI? AI, as I am sure you know, is currently seeing a surge in interest thanks to so-called generative language models. These types of models can provide complex responses to user requests in conversational prose that comes very close to passing the famous "Turing Test" for artificial intelligence. You could ask it to write you a 10-page story that involves foxes, and a fairly polished short story will be ready for you in a matter of seconds. It can also develop presentations, summarize documents, do elementary coding, and perform a host of other functions, all at superhuman speeds. By now, it has been well-documented that these generative language models remain fallible, and that the technology still has a way to go. Its responses are often inaccurate, although even in those cases, it oftensoundslike it knows what it is talking about. As with other sources of information, it is important for anyone using these tools to review the output with an appropriately critical eye and not take it at face value. But the advances keep coming, and we can only speculate as to what these models will be capable of in the coming years. So, what does all this mean for banking? Banks are already testing or using AI in a variety of areas. Banks have started to use AI models to generate personalized product suggestions for their customers, and AI can even generate and send a customized marketing email to that customer based on the model's product recommendations. Banks are also looking to AI for a range of customer service applications such as chatbots that can help reset passwords, locate a branch or ATM, and check account balances without the need for human intervention. AI has also proven useful for fraud monitoring: it can, for example, help banks spot potentially fraudulent credit card transactions, including by identifying new spending patterns that are indicative of fraud. Banks have also begun to explore the potential for using AI to refine their credit underwriting process and analysis, with the potential to speed up underwriting decisions and lower loan pricing. Like many innovations, AI involves novel risks, or at least new variations on old risks. AI models are only as good as the data they are trained on. This can raise challenges when AI depends on high volumes and different varieties of data, which can complicate efforts to detect problems or biases in datasets. Another key consideration is the "black box" problem, because with some AI models it can be difficult to explain how they arrive at outputs given a set of inputs (this is often called a lack of explainability). In some cases, even the AI developers themselves may not know precisely how the AI approach works. As I noted, we are already seeing banks use AI in a number of ways, and we have regular discussions with them about understanding and managing the associated risks.6Whether and how they might make use of generative language models remains to be seen. The technology may bring new efficiencies to banks' software development processes; or have applications in customer service; or it may be useful in some way we haven't foreseen yet. As with tokenized assets, I am curious to see how banks may make further use of AI. I also want to make sure they do that responsibly. ConclusionTokenization and AI are just a few of the innovations that may ultimately come to play a prominent role in banking and, for that matter, more broadly in the economy.I could just as easily today have talked about Web3 or quantum computing. All of these innovations will have their champions, who make claims about how their innovation will change the world; and I think it's important to view such claims critically.But it's equally important to challenge the doubters, who insist that these innovations are much ado about nothing, or that they will end in disaster.The world will change, and we should encourage innovations that show promise for benefitting society, including the financial services sector. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. "Innovation," Oxford English Dictionary, accessed April 18, 2023, https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/96311?redirectedFrom=innovation#eid.Return to text 3. Paul Volcker, "Paul Volcker: Think More Boldly,"The Wall Street Journal, December 14, 2009,https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704825504574586330960597134.Return to text 4. Christopher J. Waller, "Thoughts on the Crypto Ecosystem" (speech at the Global Interdependence Center Conference: Digital Money, Decentralized Finance, and the Puzzle of Crypto, La Jolla, CA, February 10, 2023).Return to text 5. The remainder of this speech refers to tokenized assets that are represented on a blockchain. But assets can also be tokenized on other forms of distributed ledger technology.Return to text 6. Request for Information and Comment on Financial Institutions' Use of Artificial Intelligence, Including Machine Learning, 86 Fed. Reg. 16837 (March 31, 2021).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes of its interest rate meetings from February 21 through March 22, 2023. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on March 21–22, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee ordinarily are published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 21–22, 2023:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Wharton Financial Regulation Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania It is a pleasure to join you here today to discuss financial regulation. I thought this conference would be a good opportunity to share how I think about the evolution of the financial services landscape, in particular my views on de novo bank formation, or really the lack thereof. As a part of this discussion, I'll identify reasons why policymakers should take a careful look at the lack of de novo activity over the past decade, and the potential impacts on local and regional economies and the broader financial sector should this trend continue, before discussing the potential policy response.1 De novo bank formation has essentially stagnated for the past decade during a time when financial services have rapidly evolved. Banks continue to face increasing competition from credit unions and nonbank lenders, and significant consolidation over this time has resulted in a decline in the number of bank charters in the U.S. Many banks have focused more of their activities and services on technology and innovation, with a corresponding increase in risk, including cybersecurity and operational risk. These trends will likely have significant consequences. Some of these are predictable, like limiting the availability of banking services to underserved communities. Others are indirect, like encouraging acquisitions through charter strip applications and pushing activities outside of the federal and state bank supervisory and regulatory perimeter. These trends may signal dysfunction in the de novo formation process that needs to be addressed by policymakers, and highlight the need for consideration of de novo formation as we review the U.S. regulatory and supervisory framework. Before turning to the main theme of my remarks, I would like to start by addressing the recent bank failures and subsequent stress in the U.S. banking system. Over the past several weeks some financial institutions have faced significant stress. We are still engaged in the process of learning more about the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, including reviewing the regulatory framework that applied to the firm, the supervisory oversight by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and California state regulators, and the role of the bank's management. The Board's Vice Chair for Supervision is also conducting an internal review of the Federal Reserve's oversight leading up to the failure of Silicon Valley Bank and will issue a report by May 1 that provides his conclusions. Of course, there are also a number of external reviews underway, which should contribute to a robust discussion about the root causes of the two bank failures. I believe that the U.S. financial system and the U.S. banking system remain safe, sound, strong and resilient, and standing on a solid regulatory foundation. The review of the failure of Silicon Valley Bank—both the Vice Chair's review and the independent, third-party reviews—should provide useful insight into the lessons to be learned and help guide discussions among policymakers about the gaps in current bank supervision and regulation and the potential for effective improvements to both. We should not rush to judgment with respect to these ongoing reviews. We need a full, accurate, and thorough examination and diagnosis before we reach conclusions about solutions, to ensure that the prescribed remedy addresses the underlying symptoms. If we identify shortcomings in supervision and regulation, we should and will address those shortcomings. While this episode has demonstrated that some changes may be warranted, I do not believe the failure of these two institutions is an indictment of the broader regulatory landscape. The universe of financial institutions in the U.S. includes a wide variety of banks, with very different business models, risk profiles, funding structures, and asset sizes. I'll now turn to the main theme of my speech, and to de novo bank formation. Do We Need More Banks?Should we be concerned about the decline in the number of banks in the U.S. banking system? In my view, we should. Many factors have contributed to this decline in the number of banks. But a robust and diverse banking system ensures the wider access to and availability of credit, and that this credit reaches all levels of the income spectrum and supports a range of large and small businesses. As we have seen over time, the smallest banks often outperform larger banks during periods of stress like the pandemic and during the 2008 financial crisis. Given the continued decline in the number of banks, preserving and enhancing the number of banks should be a regulatory and legislative imperative, including by encouraging new bank formation. Historically, during times of economic and financial stress, the smallest institutions have performed extremely well. For example, small banks demonstrated this strength during the pandemic through their outsized commitment to supporting small businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program. From 2002 to 2022, the number of FDIC-insured banks declined by nearly half.2This reduction in the number of chartered financial institutions seems to have largely been driven by the consolidation and merger of existing financial institutions.3While there has been a slight uptick in de novo formation over the past few years, compared to the years immediately following the 2008 financial crisis,4de novo activity has been significantly outpaced by consolidation. In my view, there are several features of the current U.S. banking system that suggest there is an unmet demand for de novo bank charters. I will briefly note three in particular: (1) the ongoing demand for "charter strip" acquisitions; (2) the shift of traditional banking activities out of the banking sector into non-bank financial entities, or the "shadow banking" sector; and (3) the rising demand for banking-as-a-service partnerships. Charter Strip AcquisitionsA charter strip acquisition occurs when a purchaser wants to open a bank with a new business model, but instead of applying for a de novo bank charter, the purchaser simply acquires an existing bank. Once the acquirer is approved to take over the charter, the bank effectively starts over with a new business model, new banking products, and new management. The replacement business model often emphasizes novel technologies and rapid growth, and if the existing, legacy banking business of the target is retained, it is often operated separately from the new business. What is the appeal of a charter strip? Simply put, it is often easier than chartering a new bank by side-stepping the de novo formation process. When evaluating a bank acquisition, regulators often rely on the legacy bank's management performance and the existing supervisory and compliance record. The purchase of an existing charter can also bring efficiencies in terms of avoiding the restrictions that apply to de novo banks, which include higher capital requirements and business model limitations for the first several years of the new bank's operation. Another benefit to a bank purchase over de novo, is that operating banks have existing core systems and other third-party relationships that can speed up the time to market for a new bank model. Therefore, a charter strip of a healthy target bank often results in a faster and cheaper approval than a de novo application. While charter strips may provide exit opportunities for the bank's previous management and ownership, these transactions can have an adverse effect on local banking markets. The target institutions for charter strips are often the smallest banks. Acquired banks may provide services in small towns or rural communities, areas that may lack robust competition. Even when these legacy bank businesses continue to operate as an add-on to the new charter-strip business model, the institution as a whole tends to become riskier, jeopardizing the long-term viability of the legacy banking business and its ability to continue providing services to the local community. Perhaps the fact that these transactions occur could signal dysfunction in the process of de novo chartering? A startup with a new business model should be agnostic between a charter strip and de novo and may actually prefer the "clean slate" of a new bank. It would then stand to reason that the applications process would be agnostic between these two transactions; both have the same result—the creation of a bank pursuing a new business model. The ongoing demand for charter strip formations, however, reveals a disparity in treatment between de novo formations and charter strips, a disparity attributable to the difference in expectations and regulatory burden between these two paths. Of course, I am not suggesting that the solution is to make bank mergers and acquisitions more restrictive—these, too, are part of a healthy banking system. Instead, I would suggest that the regulatory framework should at least be more accommodative toward the de novo process. The Shift of Traditional Banking Activities to Nonbank Financial EntitiesNonbank financial entities play a significant role in providing credit and other financial services in the U.S. economy. The role of nonbanks has been driven, at least in part, by regulatory preferences that have encouraged a shift in lending activities from the regulated banking system to nonbanks. For example, mortgage origination and servicing—both longstanding, traditional banking activities—shifted into nonbank entities following the 2008 financial crisis, with the volume of one-to-four family mortgages originated by nonbanks surpassing the volume originated by banks starting in 2016.5Nonbank lenders also play a significant role in leveraged lending and corporate lending, as well as in commercial real estate lending, agricultural lending, and consumer credit.6 The growth of lending in the shadow banking system can have significant consequences for the availability of credit over economic cycles, with losses eventually being transferred to regulated depository institutions, as appears to have occurred after the 2008 financial crisis.7While the disfavored activities may be pushed out of the regulated banking system, losses may be transmitted back into the banking system through related activities like the extension of credit by banks to those same nonbank lenders. Regulation can exacerbate and accelerate the shift of activities from insured depository institutions to nonbank financial entities. For example, research has shown that an increase in bank capital requirements for certain types of loans results in those loans simply being reallocated from banks to nonbanks.8The impact on bank activity can come about directly, for example, when risk weights are increased for certain asset classes, or indirectly, for example, when banks allocate capital internally across their various business activities. While banks are subject to significant reporting requirements, nonbanks are subject to fewer public reporting requirements, significantly limiting the transparency into the potential impact of these activities on U.S. financial stability. While there is a broader debate over the appropriate roles for bank and nonbank credit, the tradeoffs are complicated. The rise of nonbank lending has provided two important lessons that can help inform policy around de novo bank formation in the United States. First, the shift of lending activities outside the regulated banking sector suggests that there is disparate regulation for similar activities. Nonbank financial entities often operate with many fewer constraints, including a lack of capital requirements, activities restrictions, and a lesser degree of supervision and oversight. Nonbanks may also conduct less due diligence and have lower lending standards than banks. These regulatory burdens have real-world implications on where these traditional banking activities occur. The shift of activities to the shadow banking system can produce an unexpected and opaque buildup of risk, risk that can potentially destabilize the regulated banking system and the economy more broadly. For example, nonbanks may be more vulnerable to runs because they lack access to discount window lending. Second, the rise of nonbank lending also implies that investors have weighed in on the business case for de novo bank formation. Regulatory burdens affect de novo formation and have contributed to the migration of lending from regulated institutions. Nonbank financial entities have a choice about how to operate, whether to seek a bank charter or not, and the regulatory burdens of de novo formation—putting aside the obligations of operating within the regulated banking system—can themselves contribute to this shift in activities. Banking-as-a-ServiceAnother phenomenon that we have seen in the banking industry is the continued rise of "banking-as-a-service," in which banks enter into a partnership with a fintech company. In these relationships, the fintech provides customer-facing technology, while the bank provides some combination of ability to accept deposits, access to payments systems, extensions of credit, and issuance of debit and credit cards. These types of relationships can be valuable for community banks; they can help the bank provide new services or access new customers and can give the bank new business growth opportunities. This type of jump-start to innovation can make community banks more competitive with larger peers that may better be able to develop new technology and products in-house. At the same time, could the rise of banking-as-a-service also be driven—at least in part—by the difficulty of de novo chartering? If a technology company has a new technology interface and product design that may better serve customer needs, it can be substantially faster to partner with an existing bank than to seek a standalone charter. This can raise challenging operational issues about who should "own" the customer relationship, but more importantly, about who is responsible for compliance obligations. From a policy perspective, there should be no net difference in the compliance expectations for banking-as-a-service and de novo banks that engage in the same underlying activity. The policy goals should be consistency in regulatory and supervisory approach. The Consequences of Limited De Novo FormationThe continued interest in charter strip acquisitions, the shift of activities out of regulated banks into the shadow banking system, and the continued growth in banking-as-a-service partnerships all suggest that there may be some unmet demand for bank charters. As a practical matter, the consolidation of banks coupled with a deficit of new bank formations, if left unaddressed over time, could have several significant consequences. When there is a decline in bank charters, and a reduction in bank branches, the net result in local banking markets is an increase in banking concentration—the percentage of deposits and loans controlled by a shrinking number of institutions—and a decrease in competition. Our traditional measures of assessing the concentration of markets, and the competitive effect of bank mergers, is to look at deposits as a proxy for the "bundle" of banking services. While one could reasonably question whether deposits are a reliable indicator of the competition for all banking products, I think it is safe to assume that a reduction in the number of in-market banks is often related to a reduction in competition, customer choice, and availability of credit.9 Reduced competition can harm local communities and economies. Banks play a significant role in providing banking services, including mortgage loans, small business loans, and core deposit products like savings and checking accounts. For example, within bank lending, community banks play a significant role in providing loans to consumers and small businesses, construction and land development loans, residential lending, agriculture lending, and land financing. Banks with strong relationships to local communities also support those communities through the economic cycle. Banks located geographically close to businesses, like community banks, played an important role in providing credit during the pandemic, especially through the Paycheck Protection Program.10Community banks also tend to have lower loan delinquency and charge-off rates relative to larger banks, which may reflect local banks' willingness to work with borrowers during times of stress to restructure loans, in addition to these banks using their knowledge of local communities to improve loan application review and underwriting.11 It is likely that a more effective and efficient path to de novo bank formation would help support the U.S. banking system and the broader economy. Putting aside the broad range of legal, regulatory, and supervisory factors that may influence de novo bank formation, one of the key determinants in approval of a de novo application is the business case for forming a new bank in a particular target market. Does the target market have a strong economy and good growth prospects? Is there a lack of competition, for example, where mergers have reduced the number of banks in the market? Does existing competition leverage competitive pricing, or have in-market banks used their dominance to increase the cost of banking services? Of course, we know that a business case for creating a bank would be incomplete if it focused only on market need and opportunity. The process of organizing a new bank, obtaining a charter, and living within the strict rules applicable to de novo banks is a significant and costly process. Impediments to De Novo Formation and the Policy ResponseBefore policymakers can address the predictable and unintended consequences of a lack of de novo formations, it is helpful to consider the barriers to de novo formation. And, of those barriers, can they be addressed in a way that fosters prudent de novo activity? Regulatory BarriersSome of the barriers to entry for de novo banks fall outside the scope of bank regulation. For example, since the 2008 financial crisis, and until relatively recently, we have operated in a very low interest rate environment. Low interest rate environments lead to compression of interest rate spreads for taking deposits and making loans. Compressed margins, and the corresponding limits on bank profitability, present significant headwinds to de novo bank formation and returns for initial bank investors. Similarly, the demand for banking services tends to track broader economic conditions, independent from bank regulatory policy. However, policymakers should carefully consider elements of the bank regulatory framework that adversely affect de novo formation. To be clear, many of these regulatory barriers are appropriate. Insured depository institutions benefit from the federal safety net of FDIC deposit insurance, and the ability to access liquidity from the Federal Reserve's discount window. These privileges carry with them substantial responsibilities, to comply with the law, to be responsive to regulators, and to conduct the business of banking in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with consumer protection laws. At the same time, barriers to entry into the banking system should not be so strict as to effectively prevent the formation of new banks. We should support regulatory and supervisory policies that encourage prudent and appropriate de novo bank formation. Organizers of a de novo bank face a number of challenges, and the application process itself can be a significant impediment. The application process for a new bank charter often requires multiple applications to different regulators. For example, the formation of a national bank with a holding company requires the approval of the OCC, FDIC, and Federal Reserve.12While each regulator may have aspirational deadlines for processing de novo charter applications, the time actually needed can vary considerably, and is rarely quicker than anticipated. The uncertainties surrounding the application timeline may compound the difficulty of attracting capable board members, management, and employees. Even the demands of raising sufficient capital—a vital step in the de novo process—may pose challenges, as the total amount of capital is based on a forward-looking projection of the bank's expected future size. Investors could reasonably be reluctant to commit capital facing such uncertainty. Even after approval, de novo banks are subject to heightened standards and additional limits for at least three years after commencing operations.13 Policymakers have a responsibility to ensure that de novo bank formation continues to be viable, to preserve dynamism and competition in the U.S. banking system. The solution should not be to create roadblocks to bank mergers and acquisitions—which would lead to further migration of bank activities to the shadow banking system. Instead, we need to consider how regulatory burdens affect private behavior and have created impediments that discourage de novo bank formation. Efficiency in Regulation and SupervisionIn the context of de novo banks, efficiency in regulation and supervision can be thought of as an exercise in proportionality. In my mind, this is an extension of the risk-based approaches we use throughout supervision. It is certainly not a "light-touch" approach, but rather seeks to strike an appropriate balance based on the size, activities, business model, and risks of an institution. As with any new business, simply being a de novo can present additional risks, which justify heightened requirements and additional supervisory scrutiny as it grows into a viable banking operation. At the same time, policymakers need to consider whether the tight framework of requirements that govern the operations of de novo banks are necessary and appropriate, and whether alternatives may be more efficient. For example, consider whether requiring an up-front capitalization of a de novo institution in an amount far in excess of standard capital requirements is necessary, or whether in some cases a phased approach that takes into account the early performance of the de novo bank may provide similar risk protection with a lower capital burden.14,15 Regulatory obligations fall most heavily on small banks, including both community banks and de novos. While these burdens may evolve slowly over time for existing community banks—allowing banks time to adjust to heightened supervisory oversight—regulatory requirements can act as an additional barrier to entry for de novo banks. Transparency in Expectations and Regulatory SupportThe lack of de novo banks16and the trend toward bank consolidation has been a concern for some time, and I continue to see encouraging new bank formation as a priority. However, it is necessary to note that even if the regulatory message appears to support de novo activity, the regulatory tone in delivering this message matters. Investors and those seeking to organize a new bank notice when regulators encourage de novo formation. But almost more important than the words, the tone of that message must also be accompanied by actions that support, not inhibit, de novo bank formation. The banking agencies have made some progress by working to clarify regulatory expectations, giving potential applicants greater insight into the application process and by providing opportunities for feedback earlier in the process.17But I think we need to ask if these steps are sufficient, and whether they can be improved. One model for greater transparency and coordination is the approach adopted by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the United Kingdom. (U.K.)18The PRA and FCA both play a role in the review and chartering of depository institutions, and have jointly adopted the New Bank Start-up Unit initiative, which provides transparent, single-stop resources about the life cycle of de novo bank formation, including planning, applying, early-stage operation, and eventually moving into a mature, steady state as a viable banking operation. In my view, the approach adopted by the New Bank Start-up Unit includes a number of features that could help inform process improvements in the United States. While adopting some would require statutory and regulatory changes, and others to some degree may already be a component of our existing practices, I see value in looking holistically at the lessons we can learn to improve transparency and encourage the formation of new banks. First, the New Bank Start-up Unit focuses on the broader timeline of de novo formation, rather than addressing only isolated elements like the filing of an application or the requirements for early-stage operation. The process of creating a de novo bank starts before an application is filed, and is a multiyear process, ideally ending after a brief period of early operations with the de novo transitioning into a mature, viable banking franchise. Organizers evaluate their business needs, and whether those needs are best served through the creation of a bank charter. They develop a business plan and raise capital. They develop the infrastructure to support the bank, both in terms of management and personnel, but also technology, policies, and procedures. Addressing the long life cycle of de novo formation, and committing to engage with proposed organizers, can lead to better de novo applications and ultimately, more de novo banks. Second, the legal framework for de novo formation in the U.K. involves multiple regulators, but tasks those regulators with distinct, complementary assessment objectives. The PRA focuses on safety and soundness, and promoting competition between firms, while the FCA focuses on protecting consumers, enhancing the integrity of the U.K. financial system, and promoting competition in the interest of consumers. A legal framework that reduces overlapping and redundant evaluations can help facilitate efficiency in the application process and can promote greater consistency. Third, the New Bank Start-up Unit provides resources clarifying not only the requirements that apply to de novo banks, but also espouses a philosophy that emphasizes proportionality in requirements, and a case-by-case assessment of firms. For the PRA and FCA, proportionality extends to the setting of capital requirements, capital management expectations, and the calibration of capital buffers. Finally, the resources provided by the New Bank Start-up Unit emphasize the need for de novo institutions to contemplate and prepare for recovery, resolvability, and a solvent wind-down of operations. De novo banks often experience rapid growth, poor initial profitability, and loan quality issues that take time to emerge as the bank's portfolio matures. These factors can make de novo banks riskier than established banking franchises. The solution to potential weaknesses in de novo banks need not focus exclusively on increasing regulatory and supervisory requirements, particularly if there are lower cost alternatives like improved transparency, and better preparation for resolvability and solvent wind-down. While higher expectations and more capital can improve the resiliency of a de novo bank, those same expectations can contribute to a decline in the overall number of de novo charters. Closing ThoughtsIn my view, right-sizing regulatory requirements, improving transparency, and supporting regulatory approaches that support new banks are important tools to promote healthy competition and reduce unintended consequences. We need a viable pipeline for the creation of new banks in the United States, and there are troubling indications that we are falling short on this front, with a continued decline in the number of banks in the United States, the continued interest in charter strip applications, and the ongoing shift of traditional bank activities into shadow banks. While de novo bank formation may not be a top-of-mind issue for policymakers as we continue to deal with the recent bank failures, it remains an important issue. As policymakers consider the regulatory and supervisory framework in the U.S. banking system and consider specific adjustments to address identified shortcomings, we should also take into account the impact of incremental additional regulatory changes not only on de novo bank formation, but also on credit availability, competition, and the financial system. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. In 2002, there were 9,354 FDIC-insured banks. By year-end 2022, that number had dropped to 4,706. "FDIC Statistics at a Glance–Historical Trends as of December 31, 2022 (PDF)," Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.Return to text 3. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC Statistics."Return to text 4. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC Statistics."Return to text 5. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "Trends in Mortgage Origination and Servicing: Nonbanks in the Post-Crisis Period (PDF),"FDIC Quarterly(2019): 51-69.Return to text 6. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "Trends in Mortgage Origination."Return to text 7. See Joshua Gallin, "Shadow Banking and the Funding of the Nonfinancial Sector (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-50 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 16, 2013).Return to text 8. See Rustom M. Irani, Raymakal Iyer, Ralf R. Meisenzahl, and José-Luis Peydró, "The Rise of Shadow Banking: Evidence from Capital Regulation (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-039 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 24, 2018).Return to text 9. See Michelle W. Bowman, "The New Landscape for Banking Competition (PDF)," (remarks at the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, September 28, 2022).Return to text 10. See David Glancy, "Bank Relationships and the Geography of PPP Lending (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-014 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19, 2023).Return to text 11. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC Community Banking Study (PDF)," (Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, December 2020).Return to text 12. See12 U.S.C. § 21‑27; 12 U.S.C. § 1815(a)(1); and 12 U.S.C. § 1842(a)(1).Return to text 13. See "SR 20-16: Supervision of De Novo State Member Banks (PDF)," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC Rescinds De Novo Time Period Extension; Releases Supplemental Guidance on Business Planning," news release, April 6, 2016.Return to text 14. "SR 20-16: Supervision of De Novo State Member Banks" suggests that de novo banks maintain a tier 1 leverage ratio of at least 8 percent for the first three years of its existence, and that de novo banks should receive at least two consecutive CAMELS composite ratings of "1" or "2" before making capital distributions.Return to text 15. See, e.g., H.R. 758, 118th Congress, which proposes to establish a three-year phase-in period for de novo financial institutions to comply with capital requirements. Congress,"H.R.758 - Promoting Access to Capital in Underbanked Communities Act of 2023."Return to text 16. See Michelle W. Bowman, "The Lack of New Bank Formations is a Significant Issue for the Banking Industry" (remarks at 2021 Community Bankers Symposium: Banking on the Future, Chicago, IL, October 22, 2021).Return to text 17. "SR 20-16: Supervision of De Novo State Member Banks" sets key expectations for de novo banks during their early years of operation. See Jelena McWilliams, "Statement of FDIC Chairman Jelena McWilliams on the Oversight of Financial Regulators before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate," (December 5, 2019); "Licensing Manual: Charters," Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.Return to text 18. "New Bank Start-up Unit," Bank of England, last modified March 21, 2023.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At "Exploring Careers in Economics," a conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon, and welcome to "Exploring Careers in Economics." I am disappointed I cannot be with you in person, but I am thrilled you will hear from Boston Fed President Susan Collins. She is an outstanding colleague and economist, a good friend. You are in for a fantastic discussion. This event has a fairly self-explanatory title—exploring careers in economics. But the broad range of opportunities is anything but straightforward. Economics touches every aspect of daily life, and you can see its impact in the world outside your door—and inside as well. Some of you are veterans of economic study, while some of you are just "econ-curious." Either way, I hope that when you sign off today, you will have a totally different view of what economics can offer you. I was raised by academics in a college town, but even that access and insight did not give me the full picture of what was out there. A career in economics can take you in directions you never thought possible. We live in a constantly changing world, which means there is always new research to undertake, questions to be posed, and ground to break. My own studies allowed me to investigate everything from the impact of patents on the nation's economic growth to the banking system in post-Soviet Russia. They also took me to the archives of the Kremlin and to university in the United Kingdom and Senegal. And that was just during my education! My career has taken me all over the globe. Economics can take you just about anywhere, figurativelyandliterally. So I do hope that we do a good job of showing you the world of possibilities in the field. Because economics needs you. Any field that studies the behavior of an entire population, as economics does, should reflect the population it studies. We all come to the table with different experiences and backgrounds, which give each of us unique perspectives. Your generation has seen two once-in-a-century economic events within two decades. Your economic experiences are different from anyone else's. That insight and understanding will be critical to policymakers. The economics profession needs your perspective. Future Fed staff, Governors, and Chairs may be participating today—I hope we manage to play a small part in sending you down that path. Finally, on that note, I would like to encourage everyone to reach out to others joining today. Strong networks of both mentors and peers can be a lifeline. They are critical to entering and completing advanced degree programs. They help navigate the professional landscape. And they will offer both support and advice as you advance in your career. And we do hope that for some of you, that path is economics, and you will make the Federal Reserve a stop along the way. Thank you for joining us and enjoy the day.