Federal financial institution regulatory agencies today jointly issued a final policy statement on commercial real estate loan accommodations and workouts. The updates reinforce and build on existing supervisory guidance calling for financial institutions to work prudently and constructively with creditworthy borrowers during times of financial stress. The statement is substantially similar to a proposal issued last year and includes minor changes in response to comments. The statement updates and supersedes the previous guidance on commercial real estate loan workouts issued in 2009. The statement includes a section on short-term loan accommodations that was not included in the previous guidance. An accommodation includes an agreement to defer one or more payments, make a partial payment, or provide other assistance or relief to a borrower who is experiencing a financial challenge. Additionally, the statement addresses recent accounting changes for estimating loan losses and provides examples of how to classify and account for loans affected by workout activity. The statement applies to all financial institutions supervised by the agencies.
Federal bank regulatory agencies today issued final joint guidance designed to help banking organizations manage risks associated with third-party relationships, including relationships with financial technology companies. The final guidance describes principles and considerations for banking organizations' risk management of third-party relationships. The final guidance covers risk management practices for the stages in the life cycle of third-party relationships: planning, due diligence and third-party selection, contract negotiation, ongoing monitoring, and termination. The final guidance includes illustrative examples to help banking organizations, particularly community banks, align their risk management practices with the nature and risk profile of their third-party relationships. The agencies plan to engage with community banks immediately and develop additional resources in the near future to assist them in managing relevant third-party risks. The final guidance replaces each agency's existing general third-party guidance and promotes consistency in the agencies' supervisory approaches toward third-party risk management. The final guidance reflects streamlined language and improved clarity based on the agencies' consideration of public comments on the proposed guidance released in July 2021. Board memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Interagency Guidance on Third-Party Relationships: Risk Management Statement by Governor Bowman Statement by Governor Waller Board Votes
Five federal regulatory agencies today requested public comment on proposed guidance addressing reconsiderations of value (ROV) for residential real estate transactions. The proposed guidanceadvises on policies that financial institutions may implement to allow consumers to provide financial institutions with information that may not have been considered during an appraisal or if deficiencies are identified in the original appraisal. ROVs are requests from a financial institution to an appraiser or other preparer of a valuation report to reassess the value of residential real estate. An ROV may be warranted if a consumer provides information to a financial institution about potential deficiencies or other information that may affect the estimated value. The proposed guidance shows how ROVs intersect with appraisal independence requirements and compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The proposed guidance describes how financial institutions may create or enhance their existing ROV processes while remaining consistent with safety and soundness standards, complying with applicable laws and regulations, preserving appraiser independence, and remaining responsive to consumers. Additionally, the proposed guidance would describe the risks of deficient residential real estate valuations and how financial institutions may incorporate ROV processes into established risk management functions. Deficient collateral valuations can contain inaccuracies due to errors, omissions, or discrimination that affect the value conclusion. The proposed guidance would also provide examples of ROV policies and procedures that a financial institution may establish to help identify, address, and mitigate valuation discrimination risk. Comments must be received within 60 days of the proposed guidance's publication in theFederal Register. Board memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Interagency Guidance on Reconsiderations of Value of Residential Real Estate Valuations
Federal bank regulatory agencies today made available the 2023 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies. The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) encourages banks to help meet the credit needs of their local communities, including low- and moderate- income communities, in a safe and sound manner. Distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies are census tracts where revitalization or stabilization activities are eligible to receive CRA consideration. The designations reflect local economic conditions, including unemployment, poverty, and population changes. Previous years' lists and criteria for designating these areas are availablehere. Revitalization or stabilization activities in these geographies are eligible to receive CRA consideration under the community development definition for 12 months after publication of the current list. As with past lists, the agencies apply a one-year lag period for geographies that were included in 2022 but are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current list. 2023 List of Distressed or Underserved Nonmetropolitan Middle-Income Geographies (PDF) Source Information and Methodology (PDF)
WASHINGTON— Six federal regulatory agencies today requested public comment on a proposed rule designed to ensure the credibility and integrity of models used in real estate valuations. In particular, the proposed rule would implement quality control standards for automated valuation models (AVMs) used by mortgage originators and secondary market issuers in valuing real estate collateral securing mortgage loans. Under the proposed rule, the agencies would require institutions that engage in covered transactions to adopt policies, practices, procedures, and control systems to ensure that AVMs adhere to quality control standards designed to ensure the credibility and integrity of valuations. The proposed standardsare designed to ensure a high level of confidence in the estimates produced by AVMs; help protect against the manipulation of data; seek to avoid conflicts of interest; require random sample testing and reviews; and promote compliance with applicable nondiscrimination laws. AVMs are used as part of the real estate valuation process, driven in part by advances in database and modeling technology and the availability of larger property datasets. While advances in AVM technology and data availability have the potential to contribute to lower costs and reduce loan cycle times, it is important that institutions using AVMs take appropriate steps to ensure the credibility and integrity of their valuations. It is also important that the AVMs institutions use adhere to quality control standards designed to comply with applicable nondiscrimination laws. Comments must be received within 60 days of the proposed rule's publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Quality Control Standards for Automated Valuation Models Board memo (PDF)
The Federal Open Market Committee on Friday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2024: January 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday) March 19-20 (Tuesday-Wednesday) April 30-May 1 (Tuesday-Wednesday) June 11-12 (Tuesday-Wednesday) July 30-31 (Tuesday-Wednesday) September 17-18 (Tuesday-Wednesday) November 6-7 (Wednesday-Thursday) December 17-18 (Tuesday-Wednesday) January 28-29, 2025 (Tuesday-Wednesday) For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Banco de Reservas de la República Dominicana, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, to establish representative offices in New York, New York, and Miami, Florida. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced its approval of the application by Vantage Bank Texas, San Antonio, Texas, to establish a branch at 5151 San Felipe, Suite 730, Houston, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced a consent order against Silvergate Capital Corporation and Silvergate Bank, both of La Jolla, California, to facilitate the voluntary self-liquidation that Silvergate announced on March 8, 2023. The Federal Reserve's order ensures Silvergate will implement its previously announced plan for winding down the bank's operations in a manner that protects the bank's depositors and the Deposit Insurance Fund. Silvergate is also prohibited from making capital distributions, dissipating cash assets, and engaging in certain other activities without regulatory approval. The Board's action is being taken jointly with the Department of Financial Protection and Innovation of the State of California, the state chartering authority and state supervisor of Silvergate. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, and Commerzbank AG New York Branch, New York, New YorkWritten Agreement dated June 8, 2012 (PDF)Terminated June 15, 2023 Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany and Commerzbank AG New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated October 16, 2013 (PDF)Terminated June 2, 2023 Commerzbank AG, Frankfurt am Main, GermanyCease and Desist Order dated March 12, 2015 (PDF)Terminated June 2, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Wednesday that results from its annual bank stress tests will be released on Wednesday, June 28, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Stress tests are one supervisory tool used to measure whether banks have adequate capital to absorb losses so that they can lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. They evaluate banks' resilience by estimating losses, net revenue, and capital levels—which provide a cushion against losses—under a hypothetical recession scenario. This year's scenario includes a severe global recession with heightened stress in commercial and residential real estate markets. It also includes an additional exploratory market shock for the largest banks that tests them against greater inflationary pressures. Banks with $100 billion or more in total consolidated assets are subject to the Board's stress tests, with larger banks required to participate annually, and banks with $100 to $250 billion in total assets required to participate every other year. This year, 23 banks were assessed against the hypothetical global recession. Additional information can be foundhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: AgCom Holdings, Inc., Maxwell, IowaWritten Agreement dated June 9, 2023. Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Lake Shore MHC, Dunkirk, New York, and Lake Shore Bancorp Inc., Dunkirk, New YorkWritten Agreement dated June 28, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
To promote transparency, the Federal Reserve Board on Friday published adatabaseof financial institutions with access to, or requests to access, Federal Reserve Bank master accounts and services. The database is consistent with the requirements set forth in legislation enacted last year and will be updated on a quarterly basis. A master account is an account in which a Reserve Bank receives deposits for a financial institution, such as a bank or credit union. The Reserve Banks provide financial services to financial institutions much like those that banks and credit unions provide to their customers. These services include collecting checks, electronically transferring funds, and distributing and receiving cash and coin. The database has two components. The first component consists of financial institutions that currently have access to Reserve Bank master accounts and services. The second component consists of financial institutions that have requested access to master accounts and services after December 23, 2022, or had a request pending on that date, as well as the status of each request. The database also is consistent with the Board's 2022 proposal for the Reserve Banks to disclose financial institutions with access to master accounts and services. Because the statutory requirement to disclose this information supersedes the Board's proposal, the Board will not adopt its proposal. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board Memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Guidelines for Evaluating Account and Services Requests Master Accounts and Services Database Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday released the results of its annual bank stress test, which demonstrates that large banks are well positioned to weather a severe recession and continue to lend to households and businesses even during a severe recession. "Today's results confirm that the banking system remains strong and resilient," Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr said. "At the same time, this stress test is only one way to measure that strength. We should remain humble about how risks can arise and continue our work to ensure that banks are resilient to a range of economic scenarios, market shocks, and other stresses." The Board's stress test is one tool to help ensure that large banks can support the economy during economic downturns. The test evaluates the resilience of large banks by estimating their capital levels, losses, revenue and expenses under a single hypothetical recession and financial market shock, using banks' data as of the end of last year. All 23 banks tested remained above their minimum capital requirements during the hypothetical recession, despite total projected losses of $541 billion. Under stress, the aggregate common equity risk-based capital ratio—which provides a cushion against losses—is projected to decline by 2.3 percentage points to a minimum of 10.1 percent. This year's stress test includes a severe global recession with a 40 percent decline in commercial real estate prices, a substantial increase in office vacancies, and a 38 percent decline in house prices. The unemployment rate rises by 6.4 percentage points to a peak of 10 percent and economic output declines commensurately. The test's focus on commercial real estate shows that while large banks would experience heavy losses in the hypothetical scenario, they would still be able to continue lending. The banks in this year's test hold roughly 20 percent of the office and downtown commercial real estate loans held by banks. The large projected decline in commercial real estate prices, combined with the substantial increase in office vacancies, contributes to projected loss rates on office properties that are roughly triple the levels reached during the 2008 financial crisis. The $541 billion in total projected losses includes over $100 billion in losses from commercial real estate and residential mortgages, and $120 billion in credit card losses, both higher than the losses projected in last year's test. The aggregate 2.3 percentage point decline in capital is slightly less than the 2.7 percentage point decline from last year's test but is comparable to declines projected from the stress test in recent years. The disclosure document includes additional information about losses, including firm-specific results and figures. For the first time, the Board conducted an exploratory market shock on the trading books of the largest banks, testing them against greater inflationary pressures and rising interest rates. This exploratory market shock will not contribute to banks' capital requirements but was used to further understand the risks with their trading activities and to assess the potential for testing banks against multiple scenarios in the future. The results showed that the largest banks' trading books were resilient to the rising rate environment tested. The individual results from the stress test factor directly into a bank's capital requirements, mandating each bank to hold enough capital to survive a severe recession and financial market shock. If a bank does not stay above its capital requirements, it is subject to automatic restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955. 2023 Federal Reserve Stress Test Results (PDF)
CHICAGO– The Federal Reserve announced that 57 early adopter organizations, includingfinancial institutions and service providers, have completed formal testing and certification in advance of the FedNow Service's launch planned for late July. Many of these organizations will be live when the FedNow Service launches or shortly after, with financial institutions ready to send and receive transactions and service providers ready to support transaction activity. This group of early adopters is now performing final trial runs on the service to confirm their readiness to support live transactions over the new instant payments infrastructure. The early adopters include 41 financial institutions participating as senders, receivers and/or correspondents supporting settlement, 15 service providers processing on behalf of participants, and the U.S. Department of the Treasury. "We are on track for the FedNow Service launch, with a strong cohort of financial institutions and service providers of all sizes in the process of completing the final round of readiness testing," said Ken Montgomery, first vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and FedNow program executive. "With go-live nearing, financial institutions and their industry partners should be confident in moving forward with plans to join the network of organizations participating in the FedNow Service." Over time, financial institutions are expected to adopt and build on the FedNow Service with the goal of offering new instant payments services to their customers. Montgomery noted that as a platform for innovation, the FedNow Service is intended to support multiple use cases, such as account to account transfer, request for payment, bill pay, and many others. In addition to working with early adopters, the Federal Reserve continues to work with and onboard financial institutions planning to join later in 2023 and beyond, as the initial step to growing a robust network aiming to reach all 10,000 U.S. financial institutions. About the FedNow ServiceThe Federal Reserve Banks are developing the FedNow Service to facilitate nationwide reach of instant payment services by financial institutions — regardless of size or geographic location — around the clock, every day of the year. Through financial institutions participating in the FedNow Service, businesses and individuals will be able to send and receive instant payments at any time of day, and recipients will have full access to funds immediately, giving them greater flexibility to manage their money and make time-sensitive payments. Access will be provided through the Federal Reserve's FedLine®network, which serves more than 10,000 financial institutions directly or through their agents. For more information, visitFedNowExplorer.org.
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Banco de Espana Fourth Conference on Financial Stability, Madrid, Spain Today I will briefly discuss the current economic situation and the stresses that emerged in the U.S. banking system earlier this year. I will then turn to the evolution of the financial system since the Great Recession and conclude with a few general observations. I will highlight how global efforts to boost resilience in the financial sector over the past decade have been an important success. I will also discuss how recent developments have revealed residual vulnerabilities that we are going to address, and the need to be vigilant for emerging risks. U.S. economic growth slowed significantly last year, and recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace. Growth in consumer spending has picked up this year, and some indicators in the housing market have turned up recently. At the same time, activity in the housing sector remains far below its peak in early 2022, reflecting the effects of higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the past three months, payroll job gains have been robust. The unemployment rate has moved up but remains low. There are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance, including higher labor force participation, some easing in nominal wage growth, and declining vacancies. While the jobs-to-workers gap has declined, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation, however, remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in May, total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices are estimated to have risen 3.9 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices likely rose 4.7 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5 percentage points. We see the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. The economy is also facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. Tighter credit conditions are a natural result of tighter monetary policy. But the bank stresses that emerged in March may well lead to a further tightening in credit conditions. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. At our last meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5-1/4 percent while continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. We made this decision in light of the distance we have come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags in monetary policy, and the potential headwinds from credit tightening. As noted in the FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections, a strong majority of Committee participants expect that it will be appropriate to raise interest rates two or more times by the end of the year.1 When bank stress emerged in March, we acted in concert with other government agencies to address it, enabling the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to resolve two failed banks in a manner that protected all depositors. We also used our liquidity tools to make funding available to banks that might need it. In addition to our discount window, we established a new facility under our emergency lending authorities, the Bank Term Funding Program. Our provision of liquidity through these tools supported the stability of the financial system without restricting the use of our monetary policy tools to firm the stance of policy as part of our efforts to reduce inflation. The banking system remains sound and resilient, deposit flows have stabilized, and strains have eased. Evolution of the System since the Great RecessionA little more than a decade ago, the Global Financial Crisis required extraordinary interventions by governments around the world. Stabilizing the U.S. financial system required coordinated efforts by all parts of the government, including $700 billion in taxpayer funds to recapitalize banks, a suite of Fed emergency liquidity facilities, as well as government guarantees on bank transaction accounts and money market mutual funds. Despite these efforts, the Great Recession brought misery to countless millions. As the crisis slowly receded, authorities in the U.S. and around the world implemented a host of reforms. The goal was to build a system that could withstand severe shocks, including unanticipated ones that might arrive from any direction. In other words, a financial system that would be a source of strength during stressful periods. A key pillar was building resilience in the banking system. This effort was remarkably successful. Over the course of the decade, capital and liquidity at the largest U.S. banks more than doubled. We began a program of rigorous annual stress tests to ensure the banking system was capitalized against severe recessions and financial market turmoil. The Great Recession also underscored the critical importance of the nonbank sector. Here, too, the authorities have undertaken a number of steps to build resilience, although much remains to be done. In 2020 the financial system was again tested, facing a truly unprecedented shock as the pandemic brought the global economy to a standstill. Investors scrambled for safety and liquidity during the "dash for cash." Financial markets came under extreme pressure. Ultimately, the authorities had to support financial markets again as part of the extremely forceful monetary and fiscal response to the public health emergency. The banking system, however, was now far more resilient than it had been before the reforms and thus well positioned to absorb the shock. We cannot take the resilience of the financial system for granted, however. The multiple shocks we have seen over the past year or so—including the extreme volatility in commodity markets following Russia's invasion of Ukraine and, of course, surprisingly high and persistent inflation as well as the associated increase in interest rates—stressed a range of bank and nonbank financial institutions. Three General Observations Stemming from the Recent Banking TurmoilGiven the efforts to build resilience in the banking system over the past decade and a half, two natural questions are, why did Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and two other sizable U.S. banks fail this spring, and why did Credit Suisse—a global systemically important bank (G-SIB)—require a government-supported rescue acquisition? We are committed to learning the lessons from the U.S. bank failures for our program of supervision and regulation. I will offer three observations about the events. The first observation is that it is very difficult to resist the natural human tendency to fight the last war. In 2008 we saw banks come under stress from outsized credit losses and insufficient liquidity. Such losses appeared possible in the early days of the 2020 crisis, although they ultimately did not materialize. In our stress tests, we have considered severe stress scenarios that produced losses on banks' books, including outsized credit losses. But, of course, SVB's vulnerability came not from credit risk, but from excessive interest rate risk exposure and a business model that was vulnerable in ways its management did not fully appreciate, including a heavy reliance on uninsured deposits. These events suggest a need to strengthen our supervision and regulation of institutions of the size of SVB. I look forward to evaluating proposals for such changes and implementing them where appropriate.2Much will depend on getting the specifics right, and we should bear in mind that there are always tradeoffs in any financial regulation. In addition, the U.S. has benefited from its rich, multi-tiered banking ecosystem, and that diversity should be preserved. The second observation is the value of forthrightly recognizing when a crisis is building and responding decisively. When SVB failed it was clear that a number of standard assumptions, even though they were informed by hard experience, were wrong. Notably, bank runs were no longer a matter of days or weeks—they could now be nearly instantaneous. Fortunately, in concert with other parts of the government, we were able to act decisively to meet the liquidity needs of the banking system, protect depositors, and limit contagion. The third observation is the value of having the very largest banks be highly resilient. Our regulatory system is much stronger for the substantial additional safeguards we have built around the G-SIBs since the Great Recession. They are subject to capital surcharges, required to be highly liquid, and held to the highest supervisory standards. The events of the past couple of months would have been much more difficult to manage had the largest banks been undercapitalized or illiquid. ConclusionThe Great Recession was a watershed moment, demonstrating the terrible consequences a fragile financial system can have on people's lives. In response, regulators in the U.S. and around the globe set out to build a much more resilient financial system. And the ensuing experiences of the pandemic and the past few months did much to validate this approach. The bank runs and failures in 2023, however, were painful reminders that we cannot predict all of the stresses that will inevitably come with time and chance. We therefore must not grow complacent about the financial system's resilience. And building and maintaining that resilience requires collaboration. The system was able to withstand recent shocks because of the efforts by regulators and legislators, including our international counterparts in the globally interconnected financial system. We will take these lessons on board, and we will keep learning, as we must, because the work of building and maintaining a resilient financial system is never done. 1. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 2. Of course, any rule change will go through the standard rulemaking process, including public notice and comment, and have appropriate phase-in and transition periods.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At "The Future of Macroeconomic Policy,” a conference sponsored by the Norges Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the IMF Economic Review, Oslo, Norway I have been asked to talk about monetary policy and financial stability in today's economic environment.1The recent stress in the U.S. banking system has brought these two topics, their interlinkages, and the tools we use to achieve our goals to the forefront of central bank policy and public discourse. In short, although financial stability and monetary policy tools are used independently, they are nevertheless interconnected via their respective effects on the macroeconomy. So let me take a few minutes to discuss this topic in more detail. Financial stability is essential for monetary policy in the United States to achieve its congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability. Importantly, stable financial markets and institutions allow changes in the stance of policy to transmit in a smooth and expected way to the financial conditionsthat households and businesses face in making spending and production decisions. Instability in the financial system, on the other hand, hinders economic activities of households and businesses, which impedes the attainment of our dual mandate. This is in large part why the Federal Reserve monitors financial stability risks—to help ensure that banks, nonbank financial institutions, and financial markets can continue channeling credit to households and businesses. But this is a two-way street. Financial stability depends on a healthy economy, and all else equal is strengthened by monetary policy actions taken to promote our macroeconomic goals. The U.S. financial system is generally resilient enough to handle large shocks. However, in March, we saw an instance where this wasn't true. A rapid, sizable increase in interest rates resulting from persistently elevated inflation contributed to stresses in the banking system that we needed to address using our financial stability tools. Despite the interconnections between maximum employment, price stability, and financial stability, the tools we use to promote financial stability are separate and distinct from the tools we use to carry out monetary policy. And, I will argue, that separation is appropriate, as each set of tools is fit to its respective purpose. The set of tools the Federal Reserve uses to address financial stability issues is targeted and surgical. These include bank supervisory and regulatory tools that are used on an ongoing basis to promote the safety and soundness of individual financial firms and build a resilient financial system. There are also tools that provide liquidity to banks and other financial intermediaries in emergencies, such as the discount window or lending facilities created to extend credit more broadly. So far, these financial stability tools have had a good track record of effectively promoting financial stability in the United States. Numerous lending facilities set up in the spring of 2020 helped limit strains that the pandemic put on the financial system. More recently, when the failure of Silicon Valley Bank led to the loss of deposits at other banks, the discount window and a new facility to help ensure banks have the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors have been effective at containing stresses in the banking system. Importantly, these actions to address financial stability enabled us to continue to pursue our monetary policy objectives during these times. Compared with financial stability tools that address liquidity or other strains in targeted individual institutions or segments of the financial system, monetary policy affects everyone and every part of the economy and would be a blunt and less effective tool to address financial stability problems. That said, in carrying out monetary policy, we do consider how credit conditions and other factors related to financial stability are affecting the economy. As I argued in a speech last month, the recent strains in the banking sector may lead to a tightening of price and nonprice conditions for lending.2If that is the case, then it might reduce the need for at least some further tightening of monetary policy to lower inflation. The Fed could tighten policy too much if it ignored such a development. To make this argument more concrete, consider the onset of the pandemic in March 2020. The Federal Open Market Committee held two unscheduled meetings where, recognizing that the coronavirus would weigh on economic activity and pose risks to the economic outlook, it lowered the policy target range down to zero. At the same time, the unprecedented uncertainty about how the macroeconomy would be affected by the pandemic destabilized financial markets, which led the Federal Reserve to put in place several lending facilities to support the system. We took each of these actions independently; we did not lower the policy rate for the sole purpose of achieving financial stability. Although both types of tools were used simultaneously, they were used to solve different problems. Financial stresses in the banking sector are a factor that my colleagues and I are closely watching as we determine the appropriate stance of monetary policy going forward. While lending conditions imposed by banks have tightened since March, the changes so far are in line with what banks have been doing since the Fed began raising interest rates more than a year ago. That is, it is still not clear that recent strains in the banking sector materially intensified the tightening of lending conditions. Let me end by noting that some have argued that the Fed's tightening of monetary policy was significantly responsible for the failures and stress in the banking system. They argue we should have taken this into account when setting policy. Let me state unequivocally: The Fed's job is to use monetary policy to achieve its dual mandate, and right now that means raising rates to fight inflation. It is the job of bank leaders to deal with interest rate risk, and nearly all bank leaders have done exactly that. I do not support altering the stance of monetary policy over worries of ineffectual management at a few banks. We will continue to pursue our monetary policy goals, which ultimately support a healthy financial system. At the same time, we will continue to use our financial stability tools to prevent the buildup of risks in the financial system and, when needed, to address strains that may emerge. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller (2023), "Hike, Skip, or Pause?" speech delivered at the 2023 Santa Barbara County Economic Summit, University of California, Santa Barbara Economic Forecast Project, Santa Barbara, Calif. (via webcast), May 24.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Watch Live Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Scott, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I am humbled and honored to have been renominated by President Biden to serve a full 14-year term on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. In my work as a Federal Reserve governor, my background and professional experience have proven to be invaluable. I spent my childhood in Milledgeville, Georgia, in the midst of the rural, desegregating South. My dedication to public service was invigorated by observing the courage and resolve of my late parents and other members of my family. We stood alongside friends and neighbors whose names were never recorded, and others, like the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr, whose memories are engraved in our nation's history. After being a Marshall Scholar at Oxford University and earning my Ph.D. in economics at the University of California, Berkeley, I engaged in pathbreaking analytical and empirical research on economic growth, innovation, and financial institutions while on the faculty of Harvard University and of Michigan State University and as a National Fellow at the Hoover Institution. My professional colleagues elected me to help lead the field as a member of the Executive Committee of the American Economic Association, and I was selected as a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. In addition, I have gained valuable experience from my work at the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the President's Council of Economic Advisers. I have significant experience in banking and finance, as is evidenced by my service on the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and of a Community Development Financial Institution in Michigan, in addition to my employment at an investment bank and a large commercial bank. Indeed, community banks and other local financial institutions elected me as a director of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Indianapolis. When I appeared before you last spring, I pledged to protect the independence of the Federal Reserve. Over the past 13 months, I have been unwavering in my dedication to ensuring that our decisions serve the American people rather than any political or special interests. As a policymaker, I am committed to following a data-driven approach. My analysis draws extensively on high-frequency data and cutting-edge methodologies. This approach is especially important in a context where the pitfalls of relying on traditional analytical methods have been quite evident. I am acutely aware that the Federal Reserve's policy actions affect the daily lives of all Americans. The economy can only thrive when everyone can take part and contribute. Therefore, I consistently strive to engage directly with business and community leaders, workers, entrepreneurs, students and retirees, and other Americans. Listening to their experiences and perspectives where they are—from Grand Rapids to Oakland to Spartanburg to Detroit to New Orleans —has been critical for informing my own policy decisions. I am committed to promoting sustained economic growth in a context of low and stable inflation. A strong economy contributes to broad-based prosperity by bringing people off the sidelines and providing opportunities to develop key job-market skills. As I stated to this committee last year, elevated inflation is a grave threat to sustaining the expansion of the American economy. Therefore, in my role as a voting member on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I have been consistently supportive of our rapid and forceful actions to tighten monetary policy and bring inflation down. If confirmed, I will stay focused on inflation until our job is done. The American economy is at a critical juncture, and it will be essential for the FOMC to act as needed to bring inflation back to our two-percent inflation target. Senators, it has been an honor to serve the American people. As public servants, we vow to work on behalf of all Americans. I am grateful for your time and attention today, and for your consideration of my nomination. If confirmed, I look forward to continuing to work with you in this important role. Before concluding, I would like to express my gratitude to all of my family members, especially those here today—my aunt Wivona Murray Ward and my sisters, Melanie and Pamela Cook—for their steadfast encouragement, prayers, and support over many years. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
Governor Philip N. Jefferson Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate Watch Live Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Scott, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I am honored by President Biden's nomination to serve as Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. If confirmed, I will continue to use my experience and expertise in pursuit of the goals that Congress assigned to the Federal Reserve on behalf of all Americans: maximum employment and price stability. When I spoke to this committee over 16 months ago, I was a Ph.D. economist with an eclectic research background: macroeconomics and monetary economics, poverty and economic inequality, and applied econometrics. I posited then that these varied specializations would provide unique perspectives on the complex issues facing the Fed. One year of service as a Fed governor has tested this hypothesis, and I can confirm its accuracy. I have equally learned from and enjoyed the broad range of views around the Federal Open Market Committee table. As a Governor, I have focused on the design, implementation, and transmission of monetary policy; served on key committees on monetary affairs, supervision and regulation, and community banks; and chair the committee on Board affairs. The Fed's decisions affect all Americans. We consult data, empirical evidence, and research. But fully understanding the U.S. economy means understanding the experiences of those who live and work in it. Since arriving at the Federal Reserve, I have made two-way communication with the public a priority, from meeting with business and community leaders, workers, students, and retirees to public speeches. Experience shows that achieving our dual mandate fosters an environment characterized by a dynamic labor market, thriving entrepreneurship, sustainable growth, and secure and stable savings and investment. It also provides a critical foundation for monetary policy in challenging times. Our commitment to these goals will ground inflation expectations appropriately so that policy does not encumber private economic decision-making. Long-run inclusive prosperity also requires paying careful attention to the financial system's safety and soundness. The economy faces multiple challenges including inflation, banking-sector stress, and geopolitical instability. The Federal Reserve must remain attentive to them all. Inflation has started to abate, and I remain focused on returning it to our 2 percent target. Despite recent stress, the U.S. banking system is sound and resilient, and I remain attuned to any threats to its stability. Before closing, I wish to acknowledge the love and support of friends and family, especially my sons Nathan and Miles. Again, thank you for the opportunity and for your consideration of my nomination. If confirmed as Vice Chair, I look forward to working with each of you and with this Committee. I welcome your questions.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At “Fed Listens: Transitioning to the Post-Pandemic Economy,” a plenary session at Policy Summit 2023: Communities Thriving in a Changing Economy, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio Thank you, President Mester. It is really a pleasure to be here in Cleveland to join you for thisFed Listensevent. I'm especially pleased to be a part of today's discussions about how the economy continues to evolve in the post-pandemic environment.1 I find that I learn the most valuable information about economic conditions from those who are actually on the ground and working directly in the economy, so I am really looking forward to hearing from today's panelists to learn from their experiences and perspectives. As those of you here today know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met last week to discuss the economy and expectations for economic activity. I'll begin the discussion with my views on the evolution of the U.S. economy since the onset of the pandemic and on the implications of those developments for the FOMC's congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and stable prices. After the initial phases of the pandemic and the lockdowns and forced closures of most businesses, we saw strengthening economic activity accompanied by unacceptably high and persistent inflation. Over the past several years, as economic activity has continued to normalize, one consistent strength has been the resilience of the labor market. Jobs have grown at a solid pace, wages have increased for many workers, and we've seen continued low unemployment. On the other side of our mandate, price stability, the U.S. economy experienced the most significant inflation in 40 years, reaching a peak of over 9 percent last year. The FOMC has made progress in lowering inflation, but despite the significant tightening of monetary policy, we continue to see unacceptably high levels of inflation. Recent research has argued that pandemic-related supply and demand factors, in addition to unusually expansionary fiscal policy, contributed to high inflation. And global and U.S. supply chain disruptions and shipping and logistics challenges drove up prices for a number of goods.2Many of the supply-side issues have now abated, and the FOMC has rapidly increased the federal funds rate to bring demand into better balance with supply. But while headline inflation has declined substantially, it remains far too high. Therefore, I believe there is more work to do to bring inflation down. I supported the FOMC's decision last week to hold the federal funds rate target range steady and to continue to reduce the Fed's securities holdings; however, I believe that additional policy rate increases will be necessary to bring inflation down to our target over time. Although tighter monetary policy has had some effect on economic activity and inflation to date, we have seen core inflation essentially plateau since the fall of 2022, and I expect that we will need to increase the federal funds rate further to achieve a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy to meaningfully and durably bring inflation down. I will continue to monitor the incoming data and to look for signs that inflation is on a consistent downward path as I consider appropriate monetary policy at future meetings. I'm pleased to see that today's agenda for the Policy Summit includes a discussion of small businesses, which are a critical component of a thriving economy. One of the most dramatic changes in the economy since the pandemic has been a sustained increase in the creation of new businesses, most of them small. Small businesses were severely tested during the pandemic, and many stayed in business with substantial help from the Paycheck Protection Program. In the early stages of the pandemic, new business formation plunged and then surged as the economy reopened. This surge was followed by another sharp drop in the second half of 2020, and it seemed like business creation was headed back toward its long-term trend. Instead, new business formation again accelerated and now runs about 30 percent above its pre-pandemic trend.3Often, a tight labor market is associated with elevated rates of new business formation, but the extent of business startups has been highly unusual. Some have speculated that the shift to more remote work has encouraged more experimentation. Whatever the reason, entrepreneurship is the lifeblood of the U.S. economy, and I consider this to be a positive development. Another topic on tomorrow's agenda is workforce development. Traditionally, businesses and educational institutions partner to identify skills and develop training programs for the skills needed in the workforce. Community development organizations and government can also play a role in enhancing worker skills to meet the demands of a high-tech economy and increase the labor supply. Since the vast majority of workforce development is financed by the private sector, it is critical to develop enduring relationships to identify and evolve skills training to meet the needs of today's and tomorrow's workforce. Throughout the various stages of the economic recovery, due to the limited numbers of skilled job seekers, businesses reported a willingness to invest in providing required worker training. It appears that now is a good time to identify opportunities for involvement and investment in these efforts. And I am interested to learn from those of you engaged in workforce development, those who work with small businesses, and everyone working to help your communities thrive in the post-pandemic economy. Hearing this perspective is why the Federal Reserve Board startedFed Listensin 2019. While economic data can tell us a lot, learning about the experiences behind the data helps bring the economic data to life for me and for my colleagues. ThroughFed Listensand other engagement with the public, we learn about how Americans are faring in the economy and about how our policy decisions affect individuals, businesses, and communities. Those views help us understand the economy better and enable us to make better decisions. Thank you again, President Mester, for hosting today's event and for the opportunity to be part of this discussion. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Both points, about the roles of fiscal and the supply side, are addressed in a new study by Bernanke and Blanchard. See Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard (2023),"What Caused the U.S. Pandemic-Era Inflation?" paper presented at "The Fed: Lessons Learned from the Past Three Years," (PDF)a conference held at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, May 23.Return to text 3. See Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (2023),"Business Applications: Total for All NAICS in the United States,"Federal Reserve Economic Data.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Salzburg Global Seminar on Global Turbulence and Financial Resilience: Implications for Financial Services and Society, Salzburg, Austria It is a pleasure to be with you here in Salzburg.1Bank regulators, particularly in the United States, have come to an inflection point where we are again taking stock of the reforms implemented after the 2008 financial crisis and evaluating whether these reforms have proven to be sufficient. One justification for pushing these reviews forward has been the recent stress in the banking system. The regulatory framework has evolved substantially since the 2008 financial crisis. The regulatory landscape has become more restrictive, with large increases in capital and liquidity requirements, and other post-crisis reforms to improve bank resiliency. Since that time, the banking landscape has also evolved. Today, to stay competitive, banks need to be able to quickly adopt new and innovative technology. My remarks this afternoon will address the importance of a responsive and responsible regulatory framework, including regulation and supervision. A responsive framework adapts quickly to changing economic conditions, changing business activities and models, and emerging risks. A responsible framework enables regulators to make changes that are informed by open debate and take into account intended and unintended consequences. These two concepts—adapting to changing conditions, and transparency about regulatory adjustments—are intertwined. They inform my view about how bank regulation should evolve and adapt over time. This is particularly relevant now in light of the calls for reform of the regulatory framework, motivated in part by a desire to remediate perceived weaknesses that contributed to recent bank failures. Responsive Regulation and SupervisionThis year, we have seen the failures of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), Signature Bank (Signature), and First Republic Bank, and the merger of Credit Suisse into UBS. In the United States, the bank failures of SVB and Signature were accompanied by government intervention in the form of a guarantee on uninsured deposits at these institutions, and the creation of a new, broad-based, emergency liquidity facility designed to calm markets and provide reassurance about the underlying strength of the U.S. banking system. These bank failures also highlighted the need for regulators to consider reform efforts to make the financial system stronger and more resilient. Many of the problems we have seen at these banks—interest rate risk, liquidity risk, poor risk management—are not caused by any evolution in banking. These bank failures and recent stress in the banking system have highlighted key deficiencies in risk management practices, and key deficiencies in supervisory priorities. The Federal Reserve and other banking agencies have been trying to determine what more can be done to respond to the recent stress, but we also need to reflect on how reform efforts can lead to the best results, while minimizing unintended consequences. Independent ReviewIn my view, a necessary next step is to engage an independent third party to analyze the surrounding events of the recent bank failures to fully understand the factors and circumstances that contributed to the recent bank failures and to the ensuing stress in the banking system.2Several efforts have been undertaken to provide this type of after-the-fact review.3Much of the work done to date has been helpful and has brought to light some uncomfortable realities about the lead-up to the bank failures. But much of this work was prepared internally, by Federal Reserve supervision staff, relying on a limited number of unattributed source interviews, and completed on an expedited timeframe with a limited scope. Although the report was published as a report of the Board of Governors, it was the product of one Board Member, and was not reviewed by the other members of the Board prior to its publication. Troublingly, other Board members were afforded no ability to contribute to the report's content. There is a genuine question whether these efforts provide a sufficient accounting of what occurred. A supplemental, independent review would help overcome the limitations of scope and timing of these initial efforts, and address concerns about the impartiality and independence of the reviews. Additional, independent reviews could add substantial value.4These reviews should play an important role in informing the future path of supervision and regulation. The diagnosis of what went wrong can help inform necessary changes to supervision and regulation, the Fed's emergency authorities and liquidity tools, and the resolution, auction, and insurance processes of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Misperceptions and misunderstandings about the root causes and related issues could result in changes that are not only unnecessary but result in real harm to banks and their customers, to the financial system, and to the broader economy. The policy agenda—the set of reforms to supervision and regulation that are intended to remediate perceived shortcomings—has already begun to take shape, driven by the conclusions from the current set of limited reviews. And while I think some changes to supervision and regulation—such as a renewed examination focus on core banking risks like liquidity and interest rate risk and a careful review of liquidity requirements and expectations—are warranted and helpful, I am concerned that other reforms may be based on faulty assumptions or incomplete information. In particular, as the United States moves forward with implementing new international capital standards, I am concerned that new capital requirements could unnecessarily hinder bank lending and diminish competition. We need to consider whether examiners have the appropriate tools and support to identify important issues and demand prompt remediation. Increasing capital requirements simply does not get at this underlying concern about the effectiveness of supervision. I have heard the argument that recent bank stress was the result of changes Congress made several years ago to promote risk-based and tailored supervision, and a shift to a less assertive supervisory approach. I have not seen compelling evidence to support this. As I and many of my colleagues have noted, the banking system today is strong and resilient, despite recent banking stress.5This is in no small part due to the extensive reforms implemented after the 2008 financial crisis. Banks today are much better capitalized, with substantially more liquidity, and are subject to a new range of supervisory tools that did not exist prior to 2008. The strong foundation of the banking system results in banks that are well prepared to continue lending to their communities and supporting the broader economy even in stressful economic times. The underlying strength and resilience of the banking system also begs the question—what are the justifications for higher capital requirements? Supervisory ReformSupervisory reform proposals—particularly those that address a perceived retreat from robust supervision over the last few years—could similarly be improved by additional review, analysis, and discussion. The notion that any regulator, including the Federal Reserve, would purposefully promote a less assertive supervisory approach or try to limit the ability of examiners to identify issues and require remediation, is inconsistent with every experience of my nearly 14 years in the professional banking and regulatory environments—as a banker, a state bank commissioner, and as a member of the Federal Reserve Board.6Supervision has long been and continues to be a critical element of the regulatory framework at the Federal Reserve, the other U.S. banking agencies, and internationally. While I have long been an advocate for greater transparency in supervision, transparency should not be mistaken for leniency.7When we provide regulated institutions with clear expectations, and institutions fail to live up to those expectations, examiners are better positioned to require prompt remediation. This approach results in greater consistency and fairness and supports bank efforts to meet supervisory expectations by facilitating open engagement with examiners. Echoes of the PastThe recent banking stress presents many of the same dynamics that led to the savings and loan crisis in the 1980s. Savings and loan institutions have been and continue to be important providers of banking services in the United States, but during the 1980s many of these institutions failed. These institutions experienced a period of rapid asset growth, followed by rapidly rising interest rates that depressed the value of some of these assets and an erosion of customer confidence that led to deposit withdrawals. Many of these same dynamics created banking stress over the past few months, but the buildup of these risks was foreseeable. The failure to identify and properly address the buildup of these risks was a substantial oversight for the management and supervisors of SVB and was ultimately fatal to the bank. It seems obvious that reform efforts should concentrate on supervision programs and their effectiveness in identifying material risks to banking institutions. It is incumbent on policymakers, as we revisit the regulatory framework, to pursue policy informed by an impartial review of the facts. There are several areas where it is apparent that improvements are needed—more effective communication among regulators and within the Federal Reserve System and Board's supervisory program, greater transparency in supervisory expectations with enforceable and timely consequences when expectations are not met, a focus on the most relevant banking risks with a demonstrated nexus to bank stability and safety and soundness, and a clearly articulated and implementable approach to the supervision of novel banking activities. One area in particular that requires attention is the current approach to the supervision of novel banking activities, which leaves financial institutions in a supervisory void. While there have been some efforts to provide guidance, there remains substantial uncertainty about the permissibility of and supervisory expectations for these activities, including banking as a service, digital assets, and other novel activities. This leaves banks in the perilous position of relying on general but non-binding statements by policymakers only to be criticized at some point in the future. The absence of a clear regulatory and supervisory approach creates the risk that regulators may determine novel activities are impermissible or impose new requirements and expectations on these activities after the fact and, for some first movers, after significant investment. If our role is effective supervision and regulation, we must be willing to engage on both the novel and traditional activities. These changes in supervisory approach could help remediate current shortcomings and build capacity to embrace, evolve with, and respond to emerging risks. Failure to follow this approach could have significant consequences for banks navigating higher interest rates while meeting the credit and financial needs of their customers. Responsible Reform of the Regulatory FrameworkA review of bank regulation would be incomplete without a discussion of some basic principles for how the regulatory framework should evolve over time. In my view, responsible reforms reflect and incorporate a number of principles I have spoken about in the past: a commitment to transparency, accountability, efficiency, and due process.8These considerations are all important, but one overlooked aspect of responsible reform is the imperative of evaluating the consequences of revisions. I view this as an extension of the need for efficiency. A broader consideration of consequences does not assume the need for a particular reform, but instead takes into account how a particular policy change would interact with the regulatory framework and the impact on the broader financial system. In thinking through regulatory reform, it is critical to understand the context. Requirements for capital, liquidity, resolution plans, stress testing, and supervisory approach are all elements of the regulatory framework. Each of these complements the others in support of safety and soundness. So, when considering reforms, we must think about which tools are most effective and efficient in addressing identified shortcomings. I expect that we will find improvements to supervision, revisions to liquidity requirements, or improvements to bank preparedness to access liquidity are more effective than increases in capital for a broad set of banks, especially during a time of economic uncertainty. Last year, the U.S. banking regulators confirmed their commitment to implementing the Basel III endgame reforms, and I expect a proposal for public comment will be published this summer.9I intend to approach the proposal with an open mind, as we consider taking appropriate and measured steps to reform the U.S. capital framework. I support providing sufficient time, of at least 120 days, for industry and stakeholders to review and provide comment on the proposal. A key element of the rulemaking process is openness and transparency. In the past, the Board has held public meetings to consider rules of significance. During the pandemic, the Board largely departed from this practice. I believe we should return to having more public, open meetings on matters of importance. Public Board meetings enable Board members to air their views and perspectives and raise potential concerns about how proposals will affect economic activity and financial stability. Public meetings also promote accountability by allowing interested parties to hear the discussion and debate among policymakers on matters that directly affect them. As we and other regulators around the world begin the process for implementing the final elements of the Basel III international capital framework, it is imperative that we understand both the underlying goals of these changes and their practical impacts. When policymakers raise capital requirements, the tendency can be to singularly focus on the perceived benefits—higher capital implies greater resiliency of the banking system. But there's a tradeoff. Resiliency, in terms of higher capital, comes at a cost—namely, decreased credit availability and increased cost of credit in normal times—and can have broad impacts on banks, the broader financial system, and the economy. One of the core objectives of the Basel capital standards is to promote a level playing field internationally among banks subject to the standards. This objective can be challenging to evaluate—the business activities, structure, and broader financial landscape varies significantly from country to country, which complicates a horizontal evaluation of capital standards across jurisdictions. And while Basel capital standards are negotiated and internationally agreed to among financial regulators, they also require implementation by each of the many jurisdictions. In contrast, regulators in the United States have often adopted "gold-plating" for international Basel capital standards during implementation, layering on higher or expanded requirements above those adopted internationally, including an added stress capital buffer, the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio, and the "method two" calculation methodology for the global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge. Some gold-plating in the United States is the product of Congressional directives, like the so-called Collins floor, which requires large U.S. banks to calculate their capital requirements using multiple methodologies and apply the one resulting in higher aggregate capital requirements. This is not an indictment of the robust capital standards we have in the United States today, but this U.S. gold-plating is the current baseline as we consider the impact of future capital changes. While some deviation in standards is to be expected during local implementation of international capital requirements, policymakers should not ignore the underlying goal of promoting international consistency and parity. We often see deviations across jurisdictions to adjust to local market conditions and for other reasons, often by including extended phase-in periods or reducing the size of capital increases. Gold-plating U.S. standards could further exacerbate the existing differences in international capital standards. We should be mindful of how such jurisdiction-specific deviations could impact international banking activities and cross-border competition. While the policy objective in implementing capital standards is not to disadvantage U.S. banks in non-U.S. markets, or to give an advantage to foreign banks operating in the United States, if international capital standards present substantial variability across jurisdictions, they could have detrimental consequences. Non-Bank Financial Services FirmsThe effects of capital, however, extend well beyond the impact on international competition, particularly in light of the growing role of non-bank companies in financial services, the so-called shadow banking system. Non-bank competitors, who often already have a pricing advantage, compete in many of the same markets as banks without the same regulatory expectations. Rising bank capital requirements may exacerbate the competitive dynamics that result in advantages to non-bank competitors and push additional financial activity out of the regulated banking system. This shift—while possibly leaving a stronger and more resilient banking system—could create a financial system in which banks simply can't compete in a cost-effective manner. The shadow banking system has many connections to the regulated banking system. Even the resiliency of a smaller, safer banking system could prove illusory when we look deeper into the connections between banks and non-banks, for example, with subscription lines of credit supporting the private credit industry, and the indirect bank-financing of non-bank mortgage lending activities through traditional bank credit lines. How much and what types of financial activity should exist inside versus outside the regulated financial sector? We should be aware that making banks safer and sounder by pushing activity and risk to the shadow banking system may not make the broader financial system safer. Regulatory Influence on Banking Products and Services and the Broader Banking SystemRegulation has the power to dramatically reshape banking by affecting which products and services banks offer, the price of financial services, and the competitive landscape. Regulation can affect whether certain banks will be insulated from competition, ensconcing too-big-to-fail institutions atop the banking system and reducing competition and the availability of banking services in certain product markets and geographies. A thorough consideration of these dynamics should be a key element of regulatory reform. Availability of ProductsBeyond the effects of capital on competition with foreign firms and non-banks, capital requirements can also have a direct impact on bank willingness and ability to engage in core banking activities. Banks pursue business strategies and offer products notdespitecapital requirements, but with the full knowledge and understanding of the capital allocations required to engage in that activity. Increasing capital requirements can result in banks retreating from certain activities. The net result of a pullback could be higher costs due to the pass-through of higher regulatory requirements, or less availability of certain products and services for consumers. This could also increase concentration risks among competitors that remain in certain product markets. Policymakers should fully consider these real-world consequences and engage in a transparent and public discussion of the pros and cons of options for capital reform. Banking regulatory and supervisory policy—including capital policy—should be focused on promoting a safe and sound banking system. I am concerned about the adoption of reforms that attempt to steer banks toward or away from business activities. Bank regulators are not and should not be in the business of making capital allocation decisions regarding bank lending. In the same way, bank regulators should also not direct bank business strategy about the products and services offered by establishing capital requirements that are disproportionate to risk. Regulatory Reform and the Banking LandscapeA broader concern about regulatory policy, of which capital requirements are an important component, is the impact on the broader banking landscape. A regulator's initial reaction to a bank failure may be to increase capital costs, focusing on the impact of increased capital on the failed bank and limiting consideration of that impact to the point of the failure. In that narrow test sample, there is no doubt that more capital is preferable and would improve solvency. But broader regulatory reform does not impact only one bank, or impact only banks experiencing significant banking stress, or only banks that have a history of mismanagement. Broad-based changes can affect the incentives of the various tiers of firms. For example, flattening regulatory requirements—imposing the same high bar on all firms over a certain size—at first blush seems like it would improve financial resiliency. But we should not assume that the banking system would remain static in response to uniform higher regulatory standards across institutions of dramatically different sizes, complexity, business models, and risk. Eliminating banking standards tailored for these characteristics would create intense pressure on the smaller end of that spectrum to consolidate, as smaller banks struggle to adapt to regulation ill-suited for their size or complexity, applying instead regulations designed for a G‑SIB. My intuition is that this type of approach could become a self-fulfilling prophecy, as banks regulated like G-SIBs would have strong incentives to grow or merge, to help develop economies of scale that come with larger size. Instead of addressingthe problemof too-big-to-fail banks, regulation could become a tool that insulates too-big-to-fail banks from competition from smaller competitors. Fundamentally, this raises the question of the ongoing role of tailoring in supervision and regulation. The concept of tailoring—of aligning supervision and regulation with bank risk and complexity, alternatively called risk-based supervision—has recently come under threat of being eroded through regulatory reform efforts in the United States.10The tailoring approach has long been a feature of regulation and supervision in the United States, and I think it provides a useful framework for how to think about responsible approaches to regulatory reform. The Potential Impact of Risk-Insensitive Regulatory Reform on Banks and CompetitionWhat are the consequences of deviating from risk-based supervision and tailoring, when we apply standards designed for larger and more complex firms to smaller and simpler firms? As an academic matter, and operating in a vacuum, higher standards imply that banks get safer; they hold more capital, face increased scrutiny by examiners, and are subjected to higher standards on all aspects of their business. But we need to consider whether this is truly necessary, and if implemented, what would be the practical outcome? Under the weight of overly burdensome or redundant regulation, the business models of some banks may simply cease to be viable. Many banks would be unable to operate under the weight of increased compliance costs. Of course, the banking system cannot tolerate unlimited risk, and regulatory policy bears within it the choice about how much risk is appropriate within the banking system. While conservatism, and ensuring safety and soundness, may be appropriate to some degree, at a certain point regulatory requirements become unmoored from risk and force good banks out of the market. The consequences of excessive and overlapping regulations will inevitably be forced consolidation and reduced consumer choice, especially in underserved banking markets. Even in the absence of consolidation, banks always face choices in responding to regulation, and may pare back on lending to small businesses, or forfeit their banking charter and choose to operate instead within the nonbank sector. Overregulation in trading book capital requirements could increase the cost of market-making—impacting the liquidity of debt and equity markets—and increase the cost of market funding. We cannot understate the potential impacts. Communities often fund local infrastructure projects by issuing municipal bonds in public debt markets. If this funding source evaporates, or becomes more expensive, that can have severe consequences for these communities. Banking is not risk-free, and the goal of the regulatory framework is to support the safe and sound operation of banks, not to eliminate risk altogether. If one is concerned about those who are underserved in the current market, it is necessary to understand that different sizes of banks often meet the specific banking needs of unique communities and customers in geographic areas or within product lines that may not provide a variety of options. Smaller banks support their communities in unique ways, and often have deeper community ties and commitments than out-of-market competitors without direct relationships to their community. There seems to be a misperception by some—based solely on the aggregate number of banks in the United States—that there are simply too many bank charters competing for too little business. It is difficult to know what the optimum number of banks in the banking system may be, but it is important to recognize that the number of charters does not tell the whole story. A real concern is whether regulatory reform could have the unintended consequence of hollowing out the mid-sized tier of banks, effectively preventing the largest banks from facing new competition. If we believe in the virtue of competition as a way to spur innovation and improve customer choice, we need to be cautious about less risk-sensitive regulatory and supervisory expectations. If we were to apply some of the same heightened standards for banks with $50 billion or $100 billion in assets as we have for banks with trillions of dollars in assets, this inevitably would create pressure to merge to create economies of scale to lessen the cost of regulatory compliance, resulting in further bank consolidation. By doing so, we would eliminate the current dynamic banking system that incorporates institutions regulated in tiers. We would prevent the next large bank from growing to be a viable competitor, and essentially permanently and officially designate a handful of banks as "too big to fail," despite years of policymaker efforts fighting against the perceived government guarantee of only the largest banks. Our goal should not be to create a "barbell" of banking institutions based on size, with a small number of too-big-to-fail banks at the large end of the spectrum, and some smaller community banks at the low end. Bank regulation is most effective when it adapts to changing economic conditions, changing business activities and models, and emerging risks. But policymakers should not be shortsighted about the potential consequences of policy changes, consequences that may have long-term effects on the contours of the banking system. Driving activity out of banks into the shadow banking system does not make the financial system safer, it simply makes banks less competitive, and increases economic and financial stability risks. As we consider the evolution of the financial system, and the current and future role of banks within it, a renewed focus on unintended consequences is a particularly important topic to consider and would ensure that our actions support resiliency in the global financial system. Closing ThoughtsMy remarks today should not be interpreted as a categorical rejection of reform efforts. Some reform efforts—to both regulation and supervision—are a natural part of the evolution of the regulatory framework, and some would address weaknesses revealed by the recent bank failures. There is room to improve bank supervision for large banks, particularly those in Category IV of the U.S. tailoring framework, and we need to evaluate whether our regulations could have inadvertently contributed to stress in the banking system.11But these reform efforts should be both informed by an impartial and independent review of what led to the failures and healthy public debate, which should take into account the unintended consequences of reform. We must be circumspect about what went wrong, deliberate about what to fix, and cognizant of unintended consequences. It is imperative that we preserve a dynamic banking sector, with banks of all sizes that serve the needs of their unique customers wherever they are located. It is abundantly clear that regulatory and supervisory reform is on the way. But we should ensure that changes ultimately promote a safe and sound banking system. That system should serve the needs of customers and support the broader economy. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. Michelle W. Bowman,"The Evolving Nature of Banking, Bank Culture, and Bank Runs," (PDF)(speech at the 21st Annual Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States, Frankfurt, Germany, May 12, 2023).Return to text 3. See Government Accountability Office,Bank Regulation: Preliminary Review of Agency Actions Related to March 2023 Bank Failures(PDF)GAO-23-106736 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, April 2023); Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,FDIC's Supervision of Signature Bank(PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, April 28, 2023); Michael S. Barr, Vice Chair for Supervision of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank" (PDF)(April 28, 2023).Return to text 4. See, e.g., Michael S. Barr, "Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank" ("We welcome external reviews of SVB's failure, as well as congressional oversight, and we intend to take these into account as we make changes to our framework of bank supervision and regulation to ensure that the banking system remains strong and resilient."); letter from Senator Jon Tester and Senator Thom Tillis to President Joe Biden, March 18, 2023 ("Though the regulatory agencies tasked with overseeing our financial institutions have released a series of internal reports examining causes, failures, and corrective measures, we believe an independent examination that covers the full jurisdictional scope of these failures, led by non-partisan experts, is critically important."); Margaret E. Tahyar,Statement before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy of the House Committee on Financial Services, Washington, D.C. (PDF)(May 10, 2023). ("There should be a structurally independent investigation conducted with the same level of depth and professional standards that the major federal agencies require of independent investigations in the private sector.").Return to text 5. SeeJoint Statement of Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen, Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell, and FDIC Chairman Martin J. Gruenberg(March 12, 2023) ("The U.S. banking system remains resilient and on a solid foundation, in large part due to reforms that were made after the financial crisis that ensured better safeguards for the banking industry."); Michelle W. Bowman,"Considerations for Revisions to the Bank Regulatory Framework" (PDF)(speech at the Texas Bankers Association Annual Convention, San Antonio, Texas, May 19, 2023) ("While we have seen stress in some parts of the banking system, overall the system is strong and resilient. U.S. banks have high levels of capital and liquidity, and banks of all sizes continue to support the economy. To a large degree, this strength comes from the work done at the direction of Congress, most recently pursuant to the bipartisan Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, which better aligned regulation with risk"); Michael S. Barr,Testimony before the Financial Services Subcommittee, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.(May 16, 2023) ("Overall, the U.S. banking system remains strong and resilient, and depositors should be confident that all deposits in our banking system are safe.").Return to text 6. See, e.g., Randal K. Quarles,"Spontaneity and Order: Transparency, Accountability, and Fairness in Bank Supervision" (PDF)(speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Meeting, Washington, D.C., January 17, 2020) ("Through their engagement with banks, supervisors promote good risk management and thus help banks preemptively avert excessive risk taking that would be costly and inefficient to correct after the fact. Where banks fall materially out of compliance with a regulatory framework or act in a manner that poses a threat to their safety and soundness, supervisors can act rapidly to address the failures that led to the lack of compliance or threat to safety and soundness.").Return to text 7. See Michelle W. Bowman,"Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision" (PDF)(speech at the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, Orlando, Florida, February 13, 2023) ("To be clear, I do not consider transparency to mean leniency. We hold banks of all sizes to high standards, commensurate with their size and risk, and being transparent does not dilute the rigor of our regulatory standards. Transparency helps ensure that banks are aware of these standards and expectations so that they can work more effectively and efficiently to meet them.").Return to text 8. See, e.g., Michelle W. Bowman,"Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision" (PDF)(speech at the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, Orlando, Florida, February 13, 2023); Michelle W. Bowman,"Large Bank Supervision and Regulation" (PDF)(speech at the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C., September 30, 2022); Michelle W. Bowman,"Creating a New Model for the Future of Supervision" (PDF)(speech at the Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, September 28, 2021).Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Agencies Reaffirm Commitment to Basel III Standards"joint press release (September 9, 2022).Return to text 10. See, Michelle W. Bowman,"Statement on Third Party Risk Management Guidance"(June 6, 2023), ("[O]ne size fits all regulatory expectations for banks, including small banks, and failing to appropriately consider and mitigate the compliance and implementation burden imposed on these small banks, signals a concerning trend in our regulatory approach.").Return to text 11. See 12 CFR 252.5(e) (defining a Category IV banking organization).Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on June 22, 2023. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. We at the Fed remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve, and without it, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. I will review the current economic situation before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, and recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace. Although growth in consumer spending has picked up this year, activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the first five months of the year, job gains averaged a robust 314,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate moved up but remained low in May, at 3.7 percent. There are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. While the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers.1 Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in April, total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 4.4 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.7 percent. In May, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) came in at 4.0 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 5.3 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Monetary PolicyWith inflation remaining well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent and with labor market conditions remaining tight, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. We have raised our policy interest rate by 5 percentage points since early last year and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace.2We have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. The economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation.3The extent of these effects remains uncertain. In light of how far we have come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy, and potential headwinds from credit tightening, the FOMC decided last week to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5-1/4 percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. Nearly all FOMC participants expect that it will be appropriate to raise interest rates somewhat further by the end of the year. But at last week's meeting, considering how far and how fast we have moved, we judged it prudent to hold the target range steady to allow the Committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, we will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. Before concluding, let me briefly address the condition of the banking sector. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. As detailed in the box on financial stability in the JuneMonetary Policy Report,the Federal Reserve, together with the Treasury Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, took decisive action in March to protect the U.S. economy and to strengthen public confidence in our banking system. The recent bank failures, including the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, and the resulting banking stress have highlighted the importance of ensuring we have the appropriate rules and supervisory practices for banks of this size. We are committed to addressing these vulnerabilities to make for a stronger and more resilient banking system. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions. 1. A box in our latestMonetary Policy Report,"Developments in Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups," discusses differences in labor market outcomes among segments of the population.Return to text 2. A box in our latestMonetary Policy Report,"Developments in the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Money Markets," discusses changes in the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.Return to text 3. For a discussion of bank credit availability, see the box "Recent Developments in Bank Lending Conditions" in the latestMonetary Policy Report.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the 2023 International Journal of Central Banking Conference, Dublin, Ireland Thank you, Gabriel, and thank you to the Central Bank of Ireland (CBI) for hosting this year's conference. From the outside, central banking can look like the work of individual policymakers, parsing the data and making the hard decisions. In truth, it is a team effort of many people, and that has also been true for editing theInternational Journal of Central Banking(IJCB) and putting together this conference. I have a long list of people to thank who did the lion's share of that work during the year that I have served as managing editor. But first, for those who may not know it, let me review the history of the journal and touch on what this conference will address. In the summer of 2004, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the European Central Bank, and the Group of Ten central banks agreed to support the development of a new publication focused on the theory and practice of central banking. There was no shortage of research on central banking, and, indeed, central bankers themselves did and continue to publish peer-reviewed research in leading journals, not to mention many working papers published by central banks and other outlets. This work was prevalent, but there was a sense that there lacked a place for scholarly research that focused exclusively on central banking and could serve as a forum for the community of central bankers around the world. The creation of the International Journal of Central Banking filled this deficit. The primary objectives of the IJCB are to widely disseminate the best policy-relevant and applied research on central banking and to promote communication among researchers inside and outside central banks. We do this with publication of the journal, which will now be coming out six times a year, and with the added attention of this conference, which presents research on timely policy topics. With the possible exception of myself, the journal has attracted distinguished managing editors, including my colleagues from the Federal Reserve and my immediate predecessor, Luc Laeven from the European Central Bank. We have the strong support now of 55 sponsoring institutions, including the CBI and the Bank of Canada, which hosted last year's conference. In 2022, we chose the theme for this year's conference based on events very much on the minds of central bankers: "Global Supply Shocks, Trade Frictions, and Inflation." Global and sectoral supply shocks over the past few years have had significant effects on trade, economic activity, and inflation, and they figured prominently in monetary policymaking. The effects of these shocks have varied across different economies, but a common theme is elevated inflation. The current economic environment has raised several policy questions that the papers presented here attempt to answer. These are questions that policymakers, including those of here today, must grapple with, even when the answers are far from apparent. Academic research provides insights into these questions and possible answers, ways to analyze the data, and the foundations for testing theories with economic models. The papers presented here today and tomorrow are ideal examples of the kind of work that can help policymakers do their jobs better, and can facilitate sharing knowledge around the world. We have sessions on inflation, of course, and supply chain disruptions, and optimal monetary policy, and the important topic of uncertainty, which central bankers to some extent always face. Before we get to those presentations, and what I hope will be vigorous discussions, let me recognize several people who made this event possible. Assisting Governor Makhlouf at the CBI in organizing this conference has been Daragh Clancy. Daragh and Robert Kelly at the CBI worked with a subset of IJCB editors to review the papers, but let me mention all of those editors, including Klaus Adam, Tobias Adrian, Huberto Ennis, Refet Gürkaynak, Òscar Jordà, Keith Kuester, Elena Loutskina, Robin Lumsdaine, Fernanda Nechio, and Steven Ongena. This conference and the day-to-day smooth running of the journal couldn't be accomplished without the editorial team at the BIS and the Board of Governors as well as Kommaly Dias and Grace Chuan from my staff. And, finally, a big thank you to my adviser Jane Ihrig, who does so much for me and who worked very, very hard to oversee the process at IJCB for this past year. And with that, I will step away from the microphone and put the spotlight where it should be, on the scholars presenting their work today. Thank you, and I believe Daragh has a few words to get us started.