Federal bank regulatory agencies announced today that they will extend until January 16, 2024, the comment period on theirlarge bank capital proposalto increase the strength and resilience of the banking system. The agencies extended the comment period to allow interested parties more time to analyze the issues and prepare their comments. The Federal Reserve Board also extended the comment period until the same date for its proposal to modify the capital surcharge for the largest and most complex banks. Comments on both proposals were originally due by November 30. Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations With Significant Trading Activity; Extension of Comment Period Comments:Submit|View Federal Registernotice: Risk-Based Capital Surcharges for Global Systemically Important Bank Holding Companies; Systemic Risk Report (FR Y-15); Extension of Comment Period Comments:Submit|View
Federal bank regulatory agencies today jointly issued a final rule to strengthen and modernize regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to better achieve the purposes of the law. The CRA is a landmark law enacted nearly 50 years ago to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of their entire communities, especially in low- and moderate-income (LMI) neighborhoods, in a safe and sound manner. Building on feedback from commenters on the proposed rule and research, the final rule updates the CRA regulations to achieve the following key goals: Most of the rule's requirements will be applicable beginning January 1, 2026. The remaining requirements, including the data reporting requirements, will be applicable on January 1, 2027. Fact sheet (PDF) Overview of key objectives (PDF) Board memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Community Reinvestment Act Statement by Chair Powell Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Barr Statement by Governor Bowman Statement by Governor Waller Open Board Meeting on October 24, 2023
Federal bank regulatory agencies today jointly finalized principles that provide a high-level framework for the safe and sound management of exposures to climate-related financial risks for large financial institutions. The principles are consistent with the risk management framework described in the agencies' existing rules and guidance. The principles are intended for the largest financial institutions, those with $100 billion or more in total assets, and address physical and transition risks associated with climate change. The principles are intended to support efforts by the largest financial institutions to focus on key aspects of climate-related financial risk management. General climate-related financial risk management principles are provided with respect to a financial institution's governance; policies, procedures, and limits; strategic planning; risk management; data, risk measurement, and reporting; and scenario analysis. Additionally, the principles describe how climate-related financial risks can be addressed in the management of traditional risk areas, including credit, market, liquidity, operational, and legal risks. The final principles neither prohibit nor discourage large financial institutions from providing banking services to customers of any specific class or type, as permitted by law or regulation. The decision regarding whether to make a loan or to open, close, or maintain an account rests with the financial institution, so long as the financial institution complies with applicable laws and regulations. These final principles are substantively similar to the agencies' draft principles, with clarifications based on commenter feedback. Federal Registernotice: Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions Board memo: Interagency Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions (PDF) Summary of Final Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions (PDF) Statement by Chair Jerome H. Powell Statement by Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman Statement by Governor Christopher J. Waller
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the CEO/Executive Management Conference sponsored by the Mississippi Bankers Association and the Tennessee Bankers Association, Banff, Canada Thank you for the invitation to join you today. It is a privilege to speak to so many bank leaders from Mississippi and Tennessee together at the same time, and I appreciate the opportunity to be here with you.1As a former community banker, one of the most informative, enjoyable, and productive aspects of my role is the time I spend with community bankers, listening to issues that are important to you and that affect you and your customers, including, of course, the impact of the Fed's regulation and supervision. Community banks play a key role in supporting economic growth and lending to serve their customers and communities, which is an indispensable role in the U.S. economy. Before we turn to our conversation, I'd like to offer a few thoughts on the economy and monetary policy, following our Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting last month. As you know, at that meeting, my colleagues and I voted to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent, after raising rates sharply over the past year and a half to reduce inflation. Since then, there has been considerable progress on lowering inflation and the FOMC has responded this year with a more gradual pace of increases. In keeping with this approach, we held the policy rate steady in June, raised it by 25 basis points in July, and then held steady again last month. Inflation continues to be too high, and I expect it will likely be appropriate for the Committee to raise rates further and hold them at a restrictive level for some time to return inflation to our 2 percent goal in a timely way. Most recently, the latest inflation reading based on the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) index showed that overall inflation rose, responding in part to higher oil prices. I see a continued risk that high energy prices could reverse some of the progress we have seen on inflation in recent months. At the same time, the economy has remained strong as the FOMC has tightened monetary policy. Real gross domestic product (GDP has been growing at a solid pace. Consumer spending has remained robust, and the housing sector appears to be continuing to rebound. The most recent employment report showed a labor market with solid job gains. The average pace of job gains over the past year has slowed somewhat and the labor force participation rate has also improved over the same time frame, a sign that labor market supply and demand may be coming into better balance. The banking system continues to be strong and resilient. Banks have tightened lending standards due to higher interest rates and funding costs and in anticipation of future regulatory requirements. But despite this tightening of lending standards, there has not been a sharp contraction in credit that would significantly slow economic activity. Bank loan balance growth has slowed, but ongoing strong household and business balance sheets combined with the growing importance of non-bank lending suggest that monetary policy may have smaller effects on bank lending and the economy than in the past. Given the mixed data releases—strong spending data but a decline in inflation and downward revisions to jobs created in previous months—I supported the FOMC's decision to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate. Since then, the GDP data have also been revised. The frequency and scope of recent data revision complicates the task of projecting how the economy will evolve. But I continue to expect that further rate increases will likely be needed to return inflation to 2 percent in a timely way. The Summary of Economic Projections released in connection with the September FOMC meeting showed that the median participant expects inflation to stay above 2 percent at least until the end of 2025. This, along with my own expectation that progress on inflation is likely to be slow given the current level of monetary policy restraint, suggests that further policy tightening will be needed to bring inflation down in a sustainable and timely manner. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a pre-set course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions based on the incoming data and its implications for the economic outlook. I remain willing to support raising the federal funds rate at a future meeting if the incoming data indicates that progress on inflation has stalled or is too slow to bring inflation to 2 percent in a timely way. Returning inflation to the FOMC's 2 percent goal is necessary to achieve a sustainably strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone. I would also like to briefly discuss recent and future developments in banking regulation. The bank failures and accompanying banking system stress earlier this year made clear that the Federal Reserve, and in some cases the other federal banking agencies, need to address supervisory shortcomings and potentially consider revision of some failure-related bank regulations. I have previously noted my perspective on the path forward, that proposals should be (1) focused on remediating identified issues and shortcomings; (2) informed by data, analysis, and genuine debate and discussion among policymakers within each of the participating agencies; and (3) developed through a transparent and open process that allows policymakers and the public to understand the context, data, and analysis underlying the proposed reforms. The process must also incorporate the opportunity to solicit meaningful public comment. Today we have an opportunity to revisit the path of regulatory reform, starting with whether we have identified the relevant issues and shortcomings. There have been a number of reports discussing the root causes of the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), including just this past week, a report from the Board's Office of the Inspector General. Collectively, these reports have provided some valuable insights into the bank failure, but in my view, much work remains to ensure we have identified all of the factors that contributed to the failure of SVB, and the subsequent failures of Signature Bank and First Republic, including the actions of regulators in the lead-up to and following the failures. While there is overlap between many of the findings in the reports published to-date, these reports have not reached entirely consistent conclusions. One way to effectively identify and address these issues is to engage an independent third party to conduct a review. As I have said since shortly after the bank failures occurred, a third-party review should review and analyze a broader time period than the limited time periods covered to-date, including a broader range of topics and issues that are likely to identify further areas in need of reform. While this type of review would be an unusual step, it is appropriate where, as here, the existing limited reviews are driving the regulatory reform agenda, and where these bank failures have caused significant losses. Put another way, the purpose of an independent third-party review would be to analyze the events surrounding the failure of these banks, so that we can fully understand what led to the failures. This would be a logical next step in holding ourselves accountable. Before making conclusions about appropriate responses going forward to address causal issues, we need accurate, impartial, and thorough information to inform the debate about what specifically may be needed to fix any problems in our supervision and regulatory framework. While the Board has made some confidential supervisory information about SVB available to the public, an outside party has an inherent disadvantage in probing the events surrounding the failure of a bank—they do not have access to the full supervisory record, and they have no ability to conduct extensive staff interviews. The Board could easily put this criticism to rest simply by engaging an independent third party to prepare a more thorough and broadly scoped report and giving that party the necessary access to information. Of course, the staff who prepared the internal reviews, both the review led by Vice Chair for Supervision Barr, and the recently prepared report of the Board's Office of the Inspector General, had greater capacity to review internal information and speak with staff. But both of these reports themselves acknowledge their limited scope, related to the time constraints and the nature of the specific questions probed.2 While the reports produced to-date have provided some insights, it is worth pausing and reflecting on whether we have our regulatory and supervisory priorities aligned with the most pressing needs demonstrated by recent events, and whether we are taking the right "lessons learned" from these events. As regulators continue to pursue further supervisory and regulatory reforms, we should also pause and reflect on whether these changes are appropriately calibrated and executed. To be clear, supervisory priorities have already been influenced by the bank failures earlier this year. The trend seems to be that regulators are engaging in supervision with a more heavy-handed approach, focusing primarily on quarterly call report data in some cases without the benefit of direct engagement with the targeted financial institutions. The Board has long found that information received outside of a regular examination may suggest the need to carefully consider whether bank ratings remain appropriate.3But when engaging in this type of off-cycle review, we should consider whether the process is appropriately calibrated, is transparent to the financial institution, and whether it provides the financial institution the ability to engage in meaningful dialogue and discussion with examiners. In my mind, bank data analysis that occurs exclusively in an off-site context prevents supervisors from leveraging important opportunities to engage with financial institutions to effectively deliver supervisory messages. It is entirely appropriate to express concern or engage in dialogue with management, or to gain a better understanding of a bank's strategic direction or risk management approach based on reported data. Financial results are key, but in the continuum of supervision, we should not forget the value of a broader based supervisory approach that uses all available tools and considers all relevant factors. We should also carefully consider whether our approach is appropriate in the moment: Are the federal banking agencies acting in a consistent manner in their bank supervisory activities? Are federal banking agencies coordinating appropriately with state banking agencies when reviewing state-chartered banks? And fundamentally, are supervisory decisions being driven by a comparison or horizontal review of differences among institutions that may have very different business activities and risk profiles? Are supervisors acting pro-cyclically, or overreacting to the events of March 2023? When agencies adopt a more adversarial approach to supervision, or apply standards that are disproportionate to risk, does that negatively impact a bank's ability and willingness to engage in open communication with their examiners? Asking these questions can help us appropriately calibrate our revised approach to banking supervision and help us avoid reacting in a way that is disproportionate to an institution's risk to the banking system. Before concluding my prepared remarks, I'd like to discuss the Federal Reserve's and the other Federal banking agencies' rulemaking agenda. A number of rules have been proposed for comment or are currently in the pipeline. Some have already been published for comment including the proposal to implement Basel III "endgame" by significantly expanding capital requirements and bringing the threshold for compliance down to include all banks over $100 billion in assets from only the largest GSIB banks, and the expansion of the long-term debt requirement from only the largest banks again to all banks over $100 billion in assets. Still other proposals have not yet been published or moved to the next stage of the rulemaking process, including the Community Reinvestment Act rulemaking, the further consideration of climate guidance, and others. The Board has also publicly indicated it may propose additional revisions in the future to Regulation II. The scope of some of these reforms will be extensive and could reshape the contours of the bank regulatory framework in important ways, including for community banks. It is critical that stakeholders engage in the comment process and communicate with policymakers to share their views on the rulemaking agenda, including the specific impacts—intended and unintended—of any changes. Public comments, data, and analysis help to inform decisions made throughout the rulemaking and proposal process. The bankers in this room and across the country are vitally important to the banking system, and to the broader economy, and it is important that as reforms take shape, we incorporate your perspectives on the real-world consequences of any considered reform. I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. As noted in Vice Chair for Supervision Michael Barr's review of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, "[the] report was written with the benefit of hindsight on the particular facts and circumstances that proved most relevant for SVB and SVBFG. The report was prepared in a compressed time frame from March 13, 2023, through April 28, 2023, and further work over a longer period could draw additional or different conclusions." Barr,Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank. As noted in the Material Loss Review of SVB, the objective of the report was to determine why SVB's failure resulted in a material loss to the Deposit Insurance Fund, and to assess the Federal Reserve's supervision of SVB from January 2018 through March 2023. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Evaluation Report 2023-SR-B-013 (September 25, 2023).Return to text 3. Federal Reserve SR Letter 99-17 (June 24, 1999).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Connecticut Bankers Association Annual Meeting, White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia It is a pleasure to be with you here today.1As a former community banker and a former state bank commissioner, I bring a unique perspective to my service on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. These different experiences help inform my views on the Fed's important role in bank regulation and supervision. Over the past five years, I have found that one of the most informative, enjoyable, and productive aspects of my work at the Fed is hearing from bankers about issues that are important to you, and that affect you and your customers. This includes, of course, the impact of the Fed's regulation and supervision. So today, I would like to share some thoughts about that and, should changes to the bank regulatory framework be necessary, how we can support thoughtful and considered changes. Before we turn to our conversation, I'd like to offer a few thoughts on the economy and monetary policy, in light of our Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting last month. As you know, at that meeting, my colleagues and I voted to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent, after raising rates sharply over the past year and a half to reduce inflation. Since then, there has been considerable progress on lowering inflation, and the FOMC has responded this year with a more gradual pace of increases. In keeping with this approach, we held the policy rate steady in June, raised it by 25 basis points in July, and then held steady again last month. Inflation continues to be too high, and I expect it will likely be appropriate for the Committee to raise rates further and hold them at a restrictive level for some time to return inflation to our 2 percent goal in a timely way. Most recently, the latest inflation reading based on the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) index showed that overall inflation rose, responding in part to higher oil prices. I see a continued risk that high energy prices could reverse some of the progress we have seen on inflation in recent months. At the same time, the economy has remained strong as the FOMC has tightened monetary policy. Real gross domestic product (GDP) has been growing at a solid pace. Consumer spending has remained robust, and the housing sector appears to be continuing to rebound. The most recent employment report showed a labor market with solid job gains. The average pace of job gains over the past year has slowed somewhat and the labor force participation rate has also improved over the same time frame, a sign that labor market supply and demand may be coming into better balance. The banking system continues to be strong and resilient. Banks have tightened lending standards due to higher interest rates and funding costs and in anticipation of future regulatory requirements. But despite this tightening of lending standards, there has not been a sharp contraction in credit that would significantly slow economic activity. Bank loan balance growth has slowed, but ongoing strong household and business balance sheets combined with the growing importance of nonbank lending suggest that monetary policy may have smaller effects on bank lending and the economy than in the past. Given the mixed data releases recently—strong spending data but a decline in inflation and downward revisions to jobs created in previous months—I supported the FOMC's decision to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate. Since then, the GDP and employment data have also been revised. The frequency and scope of recent data revisions complicates the task of projecting how the economy will evolve. But I continue to expect that further policy tightening will likely be needed to return inflation to 2 percent in a timely way. The Summary of Economic Projections released in connection with the September FOMC meeting showed that the median participant expects inflation to stay above 2 percent at least until the end of 2025. This, along with my own expectation that progress on inflation is likely to be slow given the current level of monetary policy restraint, suggests that further policy tightening will be needed to bring inflation down in a sustainable and timely manner. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a pre-set course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions based on the incoming data and its implications for the economic outlook. I remain willing to support raising the federal funds rate at a future meeting if the incoming data indicates that progress on inflation has stalled or is too slow to bring inflation to 2 percent in a timely way. Returning inflation to the FOMC's 2 percent goal is necessary to achieve a sustainably strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone. I would now like to share some views on how I see a responsible evolution of the bank regulatory framework in my day-to-day work on the Board. To frame this discussion, I would like to revisit a few of the regulatory actions the Board has engaged in over the past year. I will identify several lessons we can learn from these actions and consider how we can apply these lessons when thinking about ongoing and future reforms to the bank regulatory framework. Specifically, I would like to address three broad themes: (1) how efficiency should be a key factor in policy discussions, (2) how to think about limits on the Board's tools to implement policy decisions, and (3) the importance of due process and public engagement in rulemaking. Efficiency should play a central role in policymaking. Policymakers should consider how a desired policy goal can be achieved in a targeted manner that minimizes costs and administrative burdens on financial institutions. In June of this year, the Board, along with the FDIC and OCC, released third-party risk management guidance for banks of all sizes. While I continue to support the overarching and worthy goal of the guidance, as I noted at the time, I think the agencies lost an opportunity to maximize efficiency in the release of this guidance. The text acknowledged theneedfor resources to assist community banks in meeting the untailored expectations set forth in the guidance, but failed toprovidethose resources on a timeline that would have improved transparency and understanding among community banks. In the absence of clearly defined expectations, the regulatory agencies should have supplemented the published guidance to ensure that the smallest banks understand how to apply the guidance to their third-party relationships.2Over the years, the bank regulatory agencies have made great efforts to enhance our approach to consider financial institution risk, business model, and asset size in our regulatory proposals and guidance. This guidance did not meet that bar, and we should do better for the smallest in size, yet largest number, of banks. The benefits of an efficient approach extend well beyond rulemaking and guidance and apply broadly to all aspects of the Federal Reserve's approach. For example, as I noted at the St. Louis Reserve Bank Community Banking Conference earlier this week, delays in processing applications can be harmful to banks of all sizes. The Board's application review processes should support the efficient resolution of applications.3One way the Board could do this is by improving the approach to processing applications in cases where a member of the public has made an adverse comment. When the recent supervisory record addresses the concerns raised in the protest and the record is consistent with approval, the decision should be delegated to the Reserve Bank for a determination.4Our goal should be to ensure that bona fide concerns raised by the public are appropriately considered, without resulting in unnecessary processing delays.5 Another important issue relates to how policymakers should consider the limits on available regulatory tools. Before the Board uses its regulatory or supervisory authority, we need to ask a basic question: Does the Board have the legal authority to use the tool in the manner contemplated? Late last year, the Board published principles for climate-related financial risk management for large financial institutions for public comment.6While I supported publishing the draft principles, I noted at the time that the Board "has specific responsibilities, established by Congress, to supervise holding companies and banks, with a focus on the safety and soundness of these regulated institutions."7Of course, any decision to mandate guidance on a narrow area like climate-related financial risk—highlighting this one risk out of the full range of risks that banks manage today—should be based on evidence of unique climate financial risks and an identified need for more guidance addressing this area. Of course, any new guidance should complement existing standards as well. As I observed at the time the climate guidance was proposed, "[t]he new principles contemplate additional obligations on firms to monitor and measure a broader set of climate-related risks, over indefinite time horizons."8Such narrow and specific guidance runs the risk of going beyond the scope of safety and soundness, by focusing on narrow, remote and uncertain risks with minimal demonstrated impacts on financial institutions. I am concerned that the Board could unintentionally interfere with the ability of a bank's management to make credit allocation decisions. Under no circumstances should the Board mandate credit allocation decisions for banks—directly through a prohibition, or indirectly through policy tools like guidance—and we must carefully evaluate this type of guidance with an eye toward whether the policy tool we use is appropriate in the circumstance. Another example I want to highlight is the use of conditions in applications. In the process of deliberating on applications that come before the Board, the Board can impose limitations or restrictions in certain circumstances, to address specific supervisory or policy concerns raised by the application. While this can be an important tool, it cannot replace rulemaking. In a Board Order approving a large bank application last year, the Board used its commitment authority in a way that "could impose heightened prudential standards at a fixed date in the future" on a firm, in a manner "inconsistent with the Board's existing regulatory framework, which imposes tailored requirements based on clear, quantitative measures of the firm's underlying risk."9This Board action highlights yet another question policymakers should ask when using one of many bank regulatory and supervisory tools, namely whether the tool is appropriate in the circumstances, or whether another tool—one established by regulation to address the very concern raised—is more appropriate.10The Board's rules and regulations are often the most appropriate and effective tools to address supervisory and financial stability concerns. Finally, I want to talk about how due process and promoting public engagement can improve the rulemaking process, including by helping policymakers understand the impact of proposed rules. In October of last year, the agencies finalized amendments to the Board's Regulation II, implementing new rules pertaining to debit card routing on different networks. During the public comment process, community banks raised substantial concerns with the proposal, specifically around the uncertainty of the rule revisions on fraud and the cost of compliance. As a result of comments raised, and my view that significant questions remained about the effect of the rule, I did not support the Board's final action.11But a key element in that rulemaking is that banks engaged in the rulemaking process shared their feedback, especially around potential fraud concerns and the speed with which the rule mandated system changes and implementation without consideration of the practical implementation and processor functionality constraints. Community banks have unique perspectives and concerns, and raising these issues with policymakers can make a difference in the contours of any final rules. In my conversations with state member banks over the past 12 months, many have shared their concerns about the proposed changes to the criteria for becoming or maintaining their designation as a certified community development financial institution (CDFI). While CDFI certification is the sole purview of the CDFI Fund within the Treasury Department, I appreciate the implications the recent proposed revisions to these guidelines may have on nearly 200 bank CDFIs and the communities they serve. But this also shows the opportunity, and the need, for the robust public engagement of affected stakeholders. From time to time, my colleagues and I disagree on policy questions. But, the rulemaking process benefits when policymakers have the full scope of information needed to inform our discussions and debate. This enables us to fully appreciate the actual impact of our policy decisions. The rulemaking process provides a path for policymakers to follow that is designed to ensure that we are aware of the important tradeoffs and considerations in understanding the intended and unintended consequences resulting from each proposal. ConclusionI would like to conclude by emphasizing the critical role you and other public commenters play in making the rulemaking process work as it was intended. This is a topic I have frequently raised, which is the importance of robust public engagement on the Federal Reserve's and the other federal banking agencies' rulemaking agendas. A number of rules have been proposed for comment or are currently in the pipeline. Some have already been published, including the proposal to implement Basel III "endgame" by significantly expanding capital requirements and bringing the threshold for compliance down to includeall banksover $100 billion in assetsfrom only the largestbanks, and the expansion of the long-term debt requirement fromonly the largest banksagaintoall banksover $100 billion in assets. Still other proposals have not yet been published or moved to the next stage of the rulemaking process, including the Community Reinvestment Act rulemaking, the further consideration of climate guidance, and others. The Board has also publicly indicated it may propose additional revisions in the future to Regulation II. The scope of some of these reforms will be extensive and could reshape the contours of the bank regulatory framework, including for community banks, and could restrict the ability of consumers and businesses to access credit and other financial services from chartered financial institutions. It is critical that stakeholders engage in the comment process and communicate with policymakers to share their views on the rulemaking agenda, including the specific impacts—intended and unintended—of any changes. Public comments, data, and analysis help to inform decisions made throughout the rulemaking and proposal process. The bankers in this room and across the country are vitally important to the banking system, and to the broader economy. As reforms take shape, it is important that we incorporate your perspectives on the real-world consequences of any considered changes. I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. "Statement on Third-Party Risk Management Guidance by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," (June 6, 2023). ("The guidance contemplates that the agencies plan to develop additional resources to assist smaller, non-complex community banks in managing relevant third-party risks, but provides no timeline for development of these resources. It also makes clear that these additional resources will not be available for some time. This leaves one to wonder why the rush to publish without appropriate tools available for small banks.")Return to text 3. Michelle W. Bowman, "The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in Banking Reforms" (speech at the 2023 Community Banking Research Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, October 4, 2023).Return to text 4. See "Statement on Application by Vantage Bank Texas by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," (June 27, 2023).Return to text 5. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision (PDF)" (speech at the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, February 13, 2023).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposed Principles Providing a High-Level Framework for the Safe and Sound Management of Exposures to Climate-Related Financial Risks for Large Banking Organizations," news release, December 2, 2022.Return to text 7. "Statement by Governor Bowman on Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions," (December 2, 2022).Return to text 8. See footnote 7.Return to text 9. "Statement by Governor Bowman on Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Resolution Requirements for Large Banks and Application by U.S. Bancorp," (October 14, 2022).Return to text 10. See footnote 9.Return to text 11. "Statement on Final Amendments to Regulation II to Clarify the Prohibition on Network Exclusivity by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," (October 3, 2022).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At a Fed Listens event on Transitioning to the Post-Pandemic Economy, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Richmond, Virginia Thank you, Tom. It is a pleasure to join you to take part in today's conversations.1When we startedFed Listensback in 2019, the initiative was part of a broad, comprehensive review of the decisionmaking framework we use to pursue our monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability. We met with people across the country from a wide range of backgrounds and perspectives, and we learned a lot about how our monetary policy actions affect them, their businesses, and their communities. In light of the valuable insights we gained in those original listening sessions, we decided to expand the scope ofFed Listensto become an ongoing process of consultation with the public. I look forward to learning from the perspectives of today's participants, our panelists, as well as those of you in the audience. ThroughFed Listensand other Board and System convenings, we are able to gain important insights about economic conditions by engaging directly with those experiencing the economy. Your views and experiences supplement the economic data that we monitor, providing important color and context. These discussions help us gain a deeper understanding of the ongoing burden from high inflation—from the considerations for families in making spending decisions to the factors weighed by business owners in applying for loans to make capital investments like new buildings or equipment to expand operations. These conversations help us look beneath the national level to see how Americans in different areas of the country are faring. I am sure that some of the issues and challenges that we will hear about today are unique to the Federal Reserve's Fifth District, while other themes will be broadly similar to those experienced in different areas of the country. This local perspective is one of the great advantages of the Federal Reserve System's regional structure and of theFed Listensinitiative. The conversations here today also help inform our thinking as we head into the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. Inflation has come down, but we know that it is still too high, and it can be especially difficult for those least able to manage the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. My colleagues and I are highly focused on returning inflation to 2 percent. Our ability to deliver on that goal depends importantly on being able to separate the short-term effects of temporary events from longer-term structural shifts in the economy. The pandemic experience abruptly changed the lives of most Americans and their families, and it has altered many long-standing economic patterns that policymakers have relied on to interpret economic developments. One example of this change is the major shift in the composition of spending by American consumers that we've seen in the past few years. In the decades before the pandemic, we observed a slow but steady decline in the share of aggregate consumer spending that was composed of goods and a corresponding increase in the share of services in total spending. In the first two years after the onset of the pandemic, the balance of spending moved back substantially toward goods and away from services, though this movement wasn't particularly surprising given the lockdowns and the fact that so many businesses in the services sector were shut down. Whathasbeen somewhat surprising, however, is that the relative strength in goods spending has persisted, rather than reverting to its pre-pandemic trends. This pattern we see in the U.S. is also unusual relative to other advanced economies, where the composition of goods versus services spending appears to have returned to historical norms. There are a number of potential explanations for these newly emerging spending patterns—some that would likely be temporary, and others more lasting. For example, the strong sales of computers, televisions, and video game consoles this year might reflect some ongoing pent-up demand following earlier supply shortages, or they might reflect a more permanent change in preferences for these goods due to the greater amount of time many of us are spending at home. Given their varied experiences and leadership roles in sectors including retail, hospitality, and health care, I am sure that our panelists—and, indeed, all of you in the audience as well—have observed these and other changes in your own lives, your businesses, and your communities since the pandemic. Sharing those observations during today's discussions will help us do our best as policymakers to promote a strong and vibrant economy. So with that, I would like to say thank you again, Tom, for hosting thisFed Listensevent and for the opportunity to be part of this discussion. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the American Bankers Association Annual Convention, Nashville, Tennessee Thank you for the opportunity to join you today.1Let me start by recognizing Indigenous Peoples' Day, and the proud history and ongoing contributions of Native Americans throughout the United States. Last month, I had the privilege to visit Native communities and Native lands in Montana to learn about the economic development opportunities and challenges in Native economies and gain a better understanding of how we can foster a financial system that works for all, including those in Indian Country. I have spent considerable time throughout my career thinking about the potential of the financial system to make a difference in the lives of individuals and their communities. Access to credit and other financial services is key to families navigating the many challenges they face and building a better future. The pursuit of this goal inspires many of you in your jobs as well. But in order for the financial system to play this role, it must be able to weather unexpected stress and continue to serve its customers and communities. And this requires that banks have sufficient capital, the subject of a proposal that the agencies recently put out for comment. Most of the banks represented in this room today—and the vast majority of banks in the country—would not be subject to the Board's recent "endgame" proposal on bank capital. The proposal affects only the very largest banks. Even so, I suspect that you have heard a lot about it! The bulk of the proposed changes have been a decade in the making, and, as the name implies, the proposal is the last major plank to address gaps in regulation dating from the Global Financial Crisis. Since the Federal Reserve Board has just begun to receive comments on the proposed rules, I cannot say how those rules will evolve, but I can try to provide more background on why I believe the benefits of the proposal would outweigh the costs. I will also discuss the importance we place on public engagement in the rulemaking process to ensure we strike the right balance between the costs and benefits of our rules. The proposal is projected to raise capital for large banks. This may result in higher funding costs. But this is only half the story. Capital also enables banks to absorb more losses without risking their ability to repay their creditors. The effective rise in capital requirements related to lending activities in the current proposal is a small portion of the estimated overall capital increase. The bulk of the rise in required capital anticipated in the proposed rule is attributed to trading and other activities besides lending—activities that have generated outsized losses at large banks and areas where our current rules have shortcomings. The estimated increase in capital required for lending activities on average—inclusive of both credit risk and operational risk requirements—is limited. Such a rise might be expected to increase the cost to banks for funding the average lending portfolio by up to 3 basis points—0.03 percentage points.2We recognize that the cost of funding for a specific loan would depend on the specific risk weight for that activity, and that there may be other channels by which higher capital requirements could matter. This is an area where commenters can shed light on additional considerations for the cost and benefits of the rule. The private costs of capital must be weighed against the social benefits of higher capital in creating a healthier, more resilient financial system, and reducing the likelihood of financial crises. As we indicated in the preamble to the endgame proposal, historical experience—particularly our experience during the Global Financial Crisis—demonstrates the severe impact that distress or failure at individual banking organizations can have on the stability of the U.S. banking system. Fifteen years ago, the Global Financial Crisis starkly revealed the cost to society of a banking system that had held insufficient capital. In the lead-up to the financial crisis, the rules didn't fully capture the credit and operational risks of asset classes like subprime mortgages, securitizations, and derivatives, which led to enormous losses at banks. Banks were woefully undercapitalized for these losses. The financial crisis upended lives and did severe damage to the economy, causing the worst and longest recession since the Great Depression. It took six years for employment to recover, during which time long-term unemployment ran for long periods at a record high, and more than 10 million people fell into poverty. Six million families lost their homes to foreclosure. And these costs occurred even with an unprecedentedly large response by government. Research suggests the costs of a financial crisis are sizable. While estimates vary widely, the cumulative loss in economic activity is consistently estimated to lie above 20 percent of annual GDP—and in some estimates up to 100 percent of GDP. For the United States, these estimates imply losses from financial crises of $5 trillion to $25 trillion based on current GDP.3The macroeconomic benefit of increased capital comes from reducing the likelihood of such a costly event. Better capitalized banks are better able to absorb losses and continue to lend to households and businesses through times of stress, which in turn, helps to ensure that we have a healthy and strong economy. The Strength of the Initial ReformsFollowing enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) in 2010, the Board adopted an initial set of reforms to increase the quantity and quality of capital, run an annual supervisory stress test, and set a capital surcharge on global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) to reflect the greater risk these firms pose to U.S. financial stability. These initial reforms have greatly strengthened our banking system and the common equity capital ratio of the largest banking organizations more than doubled, from 5.5 percent in 2009 to 12.4 percent at the end of last year. As these initial reforms were being put in place, many in the banking sector claimed that the changes would harm lending and the broader economy. Since then, the U.S. economy has grown substantially, and the U.S. banking system has grown from $12 trillion in assets to $23 trillion. Bank profitability measures—which dropped dramatically in the Global Financial Crisis—have mostly recovered and are close to historical averages. So as banks increased their capital cushions, their profitability grew, as did their market valuation. The increased strength has enabled banks to support the economy. U.S. banks have maintained their position at the top of the league tables of global capital markets activity. This is not to dismiss arguments that higher capital could harm the economy—just to note that similar warnings were not borne out in recent experience. The Case for Building on the Initial ReformsWhen the initial reforms were put in place, bank regulators acknowledged that these changes were a partial measure and that there were further elements of the capital rule that needed adjusting: Less reliance on internal models for credit risk; operational risk should be captured in a standardized way; and capital requirements did not fully capture market risk.4The agencies' proposed rule attempts to address these issues. First, the proposal would remove the use of banks' internal models to set credit risk capital requirements. In the agencies' experience, the subjective choices made for internal models have produced unwarranted variability across banking organizations in requirements for exposures with similar risks.5This can weaken confidence, reduce transparency, and challenge comparisons of capital adequacy across banking organizations. For these reasons, the proposal would replace the internal models approach for credit risk with a non-modeled approach. This so called "expanded risk-based approach" would be sensitive to important drivers of credit risk but would be standardized, transparent and consistent across banks. The proposal contains adjustments relative to the international Basel Capital Accord to ensure that on average small and large banks are required to hold similar levels of capital for key credit portfolios. The large banks subject to the proposal would continue to also be subject to the same U.S. standardized approach as applicable to all firms, in order to maintain competitive equity across the full range of providers of credit. The agencies have sought comment on this approach to competitive equity in light of the U.S. standardized approach requirement and the generally higher overall calibration of the proposed requirements. Second, turning to operational risk, large banks have experienced significant losses due to operational weaknesses over the past two decades. Experience shows that operational risk is inherent in all banking products, activities, processes, and systems and that losses at the largest banking organizations can be substantial. Under the current capital rule, the very largest, most complex banking organizations calculate risk-weighted assets for operational risk using internal models. These models can present substantial uncertainty and volatility.6In the agencies' proposal, the operational risk capital requirements would be standardized rather than modeled and would be a function of a banking organization's business volume and historical operational losses. Research suggests that banking organizations with higher overall business volume are likely to have exposure to higher operational risk.7Further, higher operational losses are associated with higher future operational risk exposure.8 Third, the Global Financial Crisis taught regulators and banks many difficult lessons about the importance of robust capital requirements for trading and market making activities. Banks at the time were undercapitalized, in particular, for the large losses that occurred in securitizations and other illiquid assets. Although the current capital rule was updated to better reflect this risk following the crisis, the current approach has some material shortcomings. Most notably, the current framework could result in capital requirements increasing during stress, rather than requiring firms to hold sufficient capital in advance of the stress to be manage through a stress period. The framework also did not account for the large range of liquidity profiles across trading exposures.9 The aim of the revised market risk framework is to comprehensively address the lessons of the Global Financial Crisis. The revised framework would permit banks to use their own models to compute elements of the market risk capital requirements only when such risk can be modeled well. Models under the new framework would need to better account for the possibility of large outlier events—tail risk—and for the illiquid nature of some trading exposures. The framework would also recognize that diversification that is beneficial in quiet times may not materialize under stress. The framework would backstop internal modeling with a new standardized approach to market risk, to be applied to trading portfolios where banks are unable to demonstrate that their models adequately capture risk. Importance of Comments and the Comment PeriodThe comment period is an important part of the rulemaking process. As I have said before, I want to reiterate that we are very interested in public input. The 120-day comment period reflects our commitment to public engagement and openness to views and goes beyond the standard comment period length. We have already heard concerns that the proposed risk-based capital treatment for mortgage lending, tax credit investments, trading activities, and activities that generate fee-based income might overestimate the risk of these activities. We welcome all comments that provide the agencies with additional data and perspectives to help ensure the rules accurately reflect risk. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. As noted in the preamble to the proposal, the agencies estimated that the capital increase for lending activities due to the proposal was roughly equivalent to a 30 basis point rise in required risk-based capital ratios across large banking organizations A 30 basis point rise in the required capital ratio would lead to an increase of 15 to 30 basis points in additional capital required for typical loan portfolios with risk weights between 50 percent and 100 percent. Assuming conservatively that the cost of equity capital is roughly 10 percent greater than the cost of debt funding, this would lead to a rise of 1.5 to 3 basis points in the cost to fund each dollar of a typical loan portfolio.Return to text 3.SeeSimon Firestone, Amy Lorenc, and Ben Ranish, "An Empirical Economic Assessment of the Costs and Benefits of Bank Capital in the U.S.," Federal Reserve Bank of St. LouisReview101, no. 3 (2019).See alsoBasel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2010, ''An assessment of the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements'' (BCBS, 2010) and Macroeconomic Assessment Group, ''Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements' (2010).Return to text 4.Press release: Reports on measures to reduce risk-weighted asset variability and on Basel III implementation by the Basel Committee (bis.org).Return to text 5. The Basel Committee has published analysis illustrating the variability of credit-risk-weighted assets across banking organizations. Seehttps://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs256.pdfandhttps://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d363.pdf. One result of these analyses is that across banking organizations, for an identical portfolio of wholesale loan exposures, required capital based on banks' internal models could vary by as much as 15 percent in either direction around a benchmark level.Return to text 6. See, e.g., Eric W. Cope, Giulio Mignola, Gianluca Antonini, and Roberto Ugoccioni, "Challenges and Pitfalls in Measuring Operational Risk from Loss Data,"Journal of Operational Risk4, no. 4 (2009): 3–27; and J.D. Opdyke and Alexander Cavallo, "Estimating Operational Risk Capital: The Challenges of Truncation, the Hazards of Maximum Likelihood Estimation, and the Promise of Robust Statistics,"Journal of Operational Risk7, no. 3 (2012): 3–90.Return to text 7. Recent research connecting operational risk to higher business volume includes W. Scott Frame, Ping McLemore, and Atanas Mihov, "Haste Makes Waste: Banking Organization Growth and Operational Risk," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Research Department Working Papers no. 23 (2020); Filippo Curti, W. Scott Frame, and Atanas Mihov, "Are the Largest Banking Organizations Operationally More Risky?"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking54, no. 5 (2019): 1223–59, https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12933; and Azamat Abdymomunov and Filippo Curti, "Quantifying and Stress Testing Operational Risk with Peer Banks' Data,"Journal of Financial Services Research57 (2020); 287–313, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10693-019-00320-w.Return to text 8. See Filippo Curti and Marco Migueis, "The Information Value of Past Losses in Operational Risk," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-003 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2023).Return to text 9. The Basel Committee has published three consultative documents on the review and to address the structural shortcomings identified: "Fundamental Review of the Trading Book (PDF)," May 2012; "Fundamental Review of the Trading Book: A Revised Market Risk Framework (PDF)," October 2013; and, "Fundamental Review of the Trading Book: Outstanding Issues (PDF)," December 2014.Return to text
In light of the Thanksgiving holiday, the Federal Reserve Board announced on Friday that the minutes of the October 31-November 1 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee will be released at 2:00 p.m. EST on Tuesday, November 21, one day earlier than normal. The minutes of each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee generally are made available three weeks after the day of the policy decision. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Citigroup Inc., New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated May 20, 2015Terminated October 19, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday finalized a rule establishing capital requirements for insurers supervised by the Board. The final rule is substantially similar to theproposalissued in September 2019. The final rule includes a framework, known as the Building Block Approach, that builds on existing state-based insurance requirements, accounts for risks that are specific to the business of insurance, and is different from the calculations used for bank capital requirements. Under the Building Block Approach, a Board-supervised insurer is required to aggregate its top-tier company's capital requirements with its subsidiaries' requirements to determine its enterprise-wide requirement. All Board-supervised insurers currently hold enough capital to comply with this rule, which takes effect as of January 1, 2024. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board memo (PDF) Delegation Order (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Risk-Based Capital Requirements for Depository Institution Holding Companies Significantly Engaged in Insurance Activities Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued an enforcement action and fined Metropolitan Commercial Bank, of New York, New York, approximately $14.5 million for violations of customer identification rules and for deficient third-party risk management practices relating to the bank's issuance of prepaid card accounts. In 2020, Metropolitan opened prepaid card accounts for illicit actors who subsequently used the accounts to collect illegally-obtained state unemployment insurance benefits. By opening prepaid card accounts through a third-party program manager without having adequate procedures for verifying each applicant's true identity, Metropolitan violated customer identification rules of the Bank Secrecy Act. The Board is requiring Metropolitan to improve its customer identification, customer due diligence, and third-party risk management programs. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with an action by the New York Department of Financial Services, the state supervisor of Metropolitan. The penalties announced by the Board and the Department of Financial Services total approximately $30 million. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: One American Financial Corporation, Sioux Falls, South DakotaWritten Agreement dated September 29, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday launched a data collection to gather more information from the banks affected by the large bank capital proposal it announced earlier this year. When the proposal was announced, the Board indicated that it would undertake this supplemental data collection. The additional data will further clarify the estimated effects of the proposal and inform any final rule, with summaries to be made public. The submission deadline for the data collection is January 16, 2024. In July, the Board, along with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation requested comment on the proposal, which is the last major bank regulatory plank designed to address failures from the global financial crisis of 2007-2008. The proposal only applies to banks with $100 billion or more in total assets and would strengthen the banking system to reduce the risk of costly financial crises. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Basel III Endgame Special Data Collection Cover Page (PDF) Basel III Endgame NPR Special Collection (NPR) (Excel) Basel III Engame NPR - Accessible Version (NPR_A) (Excel) Endgame Special Data Collection Instructions - Fall 2023 (PDF)
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. The Federal Reserve Board on Monday launched itsInstagramandThreadsaccounts with the aim of increasing the accessibility and availability of Board news and educational content. The first post on Instagram will include a brief welcome video from Chair Jerome H. Powell. Instagram posts generally will include photos, videos, frequently asked questions and answers, economic education content and more. Posts on Threads will include press releases, speeches, testimony, reports and all other content that is regularly posted on the Board's X account, formerly known as Twitter. The Board's website,www.federalreserve.gov, will remain its primary channel of communication. Selected announcements will be shared on Instagram and Threads only after they are first posted on the website. With the launch of Instagram and Threads, the Board now shares information on seven platforms includingX,Facebook,YouTube,FlickrandLinkedIn. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday requested comment on a proposal to lower the maximum interchange fee that a large debit card issuer can receive for a debit card transaction. The proposal would also establish a regular process for updating the maximum amount every other year going forward. By law, the Board is required to establish standards for assessing whether an interchange fee received by a large debit card issuer for processing a transaction is reasonable and proportional to certain issuer costs. The Board first implemented this statutory requirement in 2011, setting an interchange fee cap for debit card issuers with $10 billion or more in assets. The proposal would adjust the interchange fee cap to reflect changes in issuer costs since the rule first took effect. For example, the cap on an average-sized $50 debit card transaction would decline from 24.5 cents under the current rule to 17.7 cents under the proposal. In addition, the proposal would adopt an approach for future adjustments to the interchange fee cap, which would occur every other year based on issuer cost data gathered by the Board from large debit card issuers. The Board today also approved the release of the latest biennial report detailing data collected from large debit card issuers on interchange fees, issuer costs, and fraud related to debit card transactions in 2021. The comment period will close 90 days after the proposal is published in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing Comments:Submit|View 2021 Interchange Fee Revenue Report (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman Open Board Meeting on October 25, 2023
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee and Policy Center for the New South Marrakech Economic Festival, Marrakech, Morocco It's a pleasure to join you today to discuss the role of central banks and financial regulators in effectively promoting a stable and resilient global financial system.1Before I begin my remarks, let me first take a moment to express my deepest sympathies to those who have been impacted by last month's earthquake. I especially wish to recognize the Moroccan authorities for their efforts to host this important gathering under such challenging circumstances. We are grateful for your determination and inspired by your resilience and hospitality. Today, I will discuss some of the financial system vulnerabilities and risks that I see as most salient. These risks and vulnerabilities are top of my mind but are by no means exhaustive of those monitored by the Federal Reserve.2I will then offer some thoughts on how the Federal Reserve, and other financial regulators and central banks, may be able to address and mitigate these financial system vulnerabilities and risks so that monetary policymakers are able to continue to pursue their monetary policy mandates. The recent macroeconomic experience has presented both monetary policy and financial stability challenges for central banks. In many economies during the pandemic, supply chain disruptions coupled with strong demand as economies emerged from pandemic restrictions acted as catalysts pushing inflation up to very high levels. Aggregate demand was also supported by accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, which served to bolster the balance sheets of households, businesses, and local governments; increased excess savings; and contributed to very tight labor markets. Many central banks facing these dynamics have tightened monetary policy in an effort to bring demand and supply into better balance and to bring inflation back down to their targets. In the United States, over the past year and a half, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has increased the federal funds target range by 5-1/4 percent and has been reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, which had increased substantially during the pandemic period. We have seen some progress on lowering inflation over that time. However, inflation remains well above the FOMC's 2 percent target. Domestic spending has continued at a strong pace, and the labor market remains tight. This suggests that the policy rate may need to rise further and stay restrictive for some time to return inflation to the FOMC's goal. As they have confronted price stability challenges, central banks have also faced new financial stability risks, with some related to the sizable moves in interest rates in an environment with persistent, elevated inflation. The recent experience has also highlighted how geopolitical tensions can pose financial stability risks, for example, through greater financial market volatility or, more indirectly, through their possible effects on economic activity and inflation. Financial System Vulnerabilities and RisksLike many other central banks, the Federal Reserve continually monitors for a wide range of emerging risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system. It is critical to acknowledge that we need to be responsive to changing conditions in our assessment of and response to financial stability risks. As a case in point, in recent years, it seemed that many underappreciated interest rate risk and yet, it was poor management of this risk that created significant disruptions in the financial system this spring. With that in mind, I will discuss in more detail the financial stability risks and vulnerabilities on which I am currently most focused. Banking sectorStarting with the banking sector, the events of earlier this year have underscored the strength and resilience of the overall U.S. banking system. The vast majority of U.S. banks are adequately managing their interest rate and credit risk and maintaining prudent capital and liquidity positions. While the banking sector is expected to experience higher funding costs and some deposit outflows as a result of tighter monetary policy and higher interest rates, these outcomes can create vulnerabilities for some banks. Banks relying on more expensive deposits and that also have large holdings of long-term assets like longer-dated loans or securities with low, fixed rates will likely continue to experience a drag on earnings, especially if interest rates stay higher for longer. Should a bank be forced to sell long-term assets, the realized losses can negatively impact regulatory capital. A rising interest rate environment may also erode the credit quality of bank loan portfolios should economic activity and incomes soften, posing an additional source of risk to bank earnings and capital. It is important to monitor these evolving risks, and if necessary, take action to minimize the possible spillover effects on the wider banking and financial system. In the United States, the Federal Reserve's recent stress test of the largest banks' capital positions featured a scenario with extreme declines in asset valuations and a steep rise in unemployment. All banks subject to this test passed.3 In March of this year, we saw a run on the deposits of Silicon Valley Bank and other related banking sector stresses which highlighted banking system vulnerability to an erosion of confidence. This erosion of confidence—even when it starts at a single institution with its own unique and isolated issues—can pose risks to a larger set of institutions based on, among other things, similarities in size, business model, or customer base. As we have seen in the past, an erosion of confidence can lead to sudden large deposit outflows. Today, social media and technology can accelerate the spread of fear among depositors and bank investors, exacerbating contagion risk. Commercial real estateAnother concern relates to the potential decline in commercial real estate (CRE) property values and a resulting degradation of CRE loan quality in certain markets. Low return-to-office rates and a current trend toward businesses opting to reduce office footprints may lead to higher vacancy rates, which may put downward pressure on property values, especially in certain localities and sectors, including city centers and retail properties. Should the economy slow considerably, CRE loan quality could deteriorate as interest rates stay high or property values soften. Since 2008, underwriting standards and loan-to-value ratios on most U.S. CRE loans have become much more conservative. However, there is still a risk that a decline in property values, reduced rental income cash flows, or other shocks could impair CRE portfolios, especially if those loans mature and are refinanced at higher interest rates. While many banks are well-positioned to work with their borrowers to restructure loans or to mitigate risks of related losses, some banks with large undiversified and geographically concentrated CRE portfolios may be at greater risk. I am also monitoring the potential financial stability implications of nonperforming CRE loans that are packaged as part of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). It is much more difficult to restructure a nonperforming loan that is part of a CMBS pool when compared with nonperforming loans held directly by the lender. Pooled CMBS investments are often held in significant volumes or in concentrated shares by institutions that include large insurance companies and pension plans. Were these institutions to suffer significant losses on their CMBS holdings, there could be broader effects on the securitization pipeline for CMBS and on the CRE market. Nonbank financial institutionsI am also closely watching other financial stability vulnerabilities posed by large nonbank financial institutions. Hedge fund leverage remains elevated and prime money market funds, insurance companies, and some corporate bond mutual funds remain vulnerable to run risks. In addition to this risk, it is also important to monitor the interest rate and funding vulnerabilities of these entities in the current macroeconomic and interest rate environment. These are not novel vulnerabilities, however, as the nonbank financial institution sector continues to expand, monitoring these risks has become especially important. U.S. Treasury marketsU.S. Treasury market stress events—including the repo-market stress in September 2019 and the March 2020 dash for cash—have raised concerns about the resiliency of U.S. Treasury markets. Last year's government securities market stress in the United Kingdom also highlighted how disruptions in the functioning of these markets can disrupt central bank plans including the path of balance sheet reduction, even if temporarily. Indicators of U.S. Treasury market liquidity have remained stable, and Treasury markets have continued to function, but risks remain.4It will be important to watch for signs of impaired Treasury market functioning, especially as the Federal Reserve continues to reduce its holdings of Treasury securities and Treasury auction volumes expand to meet issuance needs. Designing and Calibrating Policies to Promote Financial StabilityAs a general principle, central banks and other regulatory authorities may choose to proactively use supervisory and regulatory tools to mitigate financial stability risks and vulnerabilities. Should financial stability risks be realized, it may become necessary to implement central bank and other targeted emergency liquidity or lending facilities. A central bank's implementation of monetary policy may influence the financial stability risks that are most salient. In many jurisdictions, including the United States, financial stability tools separate and distinct from monetary policy tools may be most effective to mitigate and address financial stability risks. The separation of these tools can allow monetary policy decisionmaking to remain focused on achieving central bank monetary policy goals.5 That said, not all of the financial stability risks and vulnerabilities that I have highlighted require policy changes. In fact, it is possible that an overreaction in adjusting policies in light of recent stresses could worsen conditions rather than ameliorate them. Balance of bank supervision and regulationAs we learned from the recent U.S. bank failures, responsive, efficient, and effective bank supervision is a strong mitigant for financial system risks and vulnerabilities. The failures revealed that shortcomings in bank supervision can heighten financial stability risks. The primary focus of supervision should be to address a bank's critical shortcomings in a timely way.6To effectively support financial stability, bank supervision cannot simply rely on pinpointing compliance issues, failed processes, or rule violations. It must go further to examine a bank's risk exposures while prioritizing core safety and soundness issues in the context of the bank's financial condition. If the supervisory process fails to identify and escalate critical risks, or to hold management accountable for known deficiencies, such as excess interest rate risk-taking, this raises the potential for supervisory shortcomings, including the ability to anticipate how the evolving macro-financial landscape can affect a bank's condition. As the regulatory framework becomes more complex, we must ensure that supervisors and examiners are adequately equipped to implement and maintain the highest quality of supervision. Even as we focus on improvements to the bank regulatory framework, we should also ensure that supervision includes bank management and their boards of directors. As changes are made to supervisory activities, these changes should be open and transparent, and should be implemented with an appropriate consideration of the tradeoffs and unintended consequences. No regulatory or supervisory framework can be effective without accountability. Regulatory capital requirements, no matter how conservatively calibrated they may be, are simply no substitute for sound risk management and strong, effective, efficient, and transparent supervision. The vast majority of improvements to supervisory functions could be accomplished without broad changes to the regulatory framework. While some changes to the regulatory framework may be appropriate to promote financial stability, we should be careful to ensure that changes do not harm the long-term viability of banks, especially midsized and smaller banks. In my view, regulatory reform can pose significant financial stability risks, particularly if those changes to regulation fail to take sufficient account of the incentive effects and potential consequences. Regulatory actions also have the capacity to depress economic activity through the reduced availability of credit or by limiting the availability of financial products or services. These concerns are most acute when the reforms themselves may be inefficient or poorly targeted. For example, policymakers should carefully consider whether the contemplated significant increases in capital requirements in the United States related to the finalization of Basel III capital standards meet this standard for being efficient and appropriately targeted. Regulatory approaches in the banking sector must also allow for innovation. Inhibiting innovation in the banking sector could push growth of certain products and services further into the nonbank sector, leading to much less transparency and potentially greater financial stability risk. A comprehensive regulatory approach must include enforcing existing regulation through effective supervision, expanding the regulatory perimeter, and addressing regulatory gaps. Nonbank financial institution supervision and regulationA key component of fostering financial stability is to ensure that every institution that engages in similar financial activities with similar risks is treated similarly under supervisory and regulatory authorities. Many nonbank financial institutions and products are subject to differing degrees of regulation, oversight, and monitoring. While it is important that the banking system is well-regulated and supervised, it is equally important that this is the case for other types of financial institutions, products, or services. Developing effective frameworks for regulating and supervising common financial markets and products is important for ensuring the protection of consumers and for the stability of the financial system. The Federal Reserve appreciates the work that the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has undertaken in this area and the strong support my co-panelist Governor Klaas Knot has provided in his role as chair of the FSB. With respect to Treasury market functioning, it is also important that the U.S. continues to carefully consider proposals that could support Treasury market resilience and reduce the likelihood that the Federal Reserve would need to step in to restore market functioning during stressed conditions. For example, in the U.S. the largest banks are subject to a leverage ratio and global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge that are set much higher than the international standard. These higher levels need to be reconsidered to ensure that dealers have adequate balance sheet capacity to intermediate Treasury markets in times of stress. Likewise, increasing data transparency on market pricing and flow should also be considered to encourage intermediary entry and competition.7 Central bank liquidity provision and lending facilitiesShould financial stability risks materialize, central banks must be prepared to provide targeted liquidity to financial institutions during times of stress to restore market functioning and financial stability. The use of these lending programs during the pandemic demonstrated their effectiveness in serving as backstops to support market functioning and the flow of credit in times of stress.8When appropriately calibrated, these programs can help promote market functioning but limit the Federal Reserve's overall footprint in financial markets in the longer term. It is also important to clearly distinguish any temporary central bank asset purchase programs to promote core financial market functioning from monetary policy actions.9 In the banking system, it is also important that tools to support bank liquidity and payments—including discount window operations and Fedwire®within the Federal Reserve—are available for extended operating hours and are prepared to provide support during times of stress. We should also consider what further steps are needed to ensure that banks have access to liquidity support. In addition, we should encourage, but not mandate, the exercise of contingency funding plans and testing capabilities, requiring bank management to ensure adequate plans are in place. In the Treasury markets, the Federal Reserve should ensure that tools like the standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility are available to serve as backstops in money markets to support the effective implementation of monetary policy and smooth market functioning. Well-calibrated international swap lines and repo facilities can also be helpful in promoting both Treasury market and dollar market functioning. Of course,allcentral bank lending tools should serve as temporary backstops. Central banks and other agencies should ensure that regulations and market oversight foster prudent financial institution behavior and resiliency in core financial markets. Doing so can increase the ability of private markets and institutions to function during times of stress and reduce the likelihood of future market interventions by the central bank. ConclusionMany central banks are facing challenging and uncertain times as they strive to restore price stability and promote financial stability. A stable and resilient financial system is essential for the effective transmission of monetary policy and for a healthy economy. Healthy economies foster financial stability and financial stability fosters healthy economies. It is essential that central banks facing high inflation bring inflation back to target. A failure to do so would only lead to greater financial stability risks through less certain and unstable economic conditions and through reduced central bank credibility. It is, therefore, necessary that central banks, in collaboration with other financial regulators as appropriate, develop and use supervisory and prudential regulatory tools to promote financial stability. Effective supervision and regulation, in turn, will support the effective conduct of monetary policy in achieving central banks' macroeconomic objectives. As these issues transcend national borders, central banks and regulatory authorities must also aim to build an international perspective that is complementary to or informed by global collaboration. This perspective has never been more important. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Financial Stability Report(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2023).Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests 2023.Return to text 4. For example, dealer balance sheet capacity may become strained, especially in times of volatile financial markets, limiting market funding in Treasury markets. See, for example, Darrell Duffie, Michael J. Fleming, Frank M. Keane, Claire Nelson, Or Shachar, and Peter Van Tassel, "Dealer Capacity and U.S. Treasury Market Functionality," Staff Report 1070 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2023).Return to text 5. Of course, should a financial stability risk event affect the economy or the economic outlook, for example, through a slowdown in economic activity, monetary policymakers might take this into account when determining appropriate monetary policy.Return to text 6. This timeless principle was recently discussed in the current context by Tobias Adrian, Marina Moretti, Ana Carvalho, Hee Kyong Chon, Katharine Seal, Fabiana Melo, and Jay Surti, "Good Supervision: Lessons from the Field (PDF)," Working Paper 23/181 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, September 2023).Return to text 7. See, for example, Inter-Agency Working Group for Treasury Market Surveillance (IAWG),Enhancing the Resilience of the U.S. Treasury Market: 2022 Staff Progress Report(PDF)(Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, November 10, 2022); as well as, Darrell Duffie, "Resilience Redux in the U.S. Treasury Market (PDF)" (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium Paper, August 13, 2023).Return to text 8. For details on these programs, see "Funding, Credit, Liquidity, and Loan Facilities," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last modified July 7, 2023.Return to text 9. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Panel on 'Design Issues for Central Bank Facilities in the Future'" (speech at the Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets Workshop on Market Dysfunction, Chicago, Illinois, March 3, 2023).Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the 2023 Daniel Patrick Moynihan Lecture on Social Science and Public Policy, hosted by the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Washington, D.C. I am delighted and honored to introduce Professor Alan Blinder as this year's winner of the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Prize. The Moynihan Prize honors those who "champion the use of informed judgment to advance the public good."1In the field of economics, I can think of no better example of such a champion than Alan Blinder. The very heart of his distinguished career has been advancing the use of informed judgment in economic policymaking. As Alan has observed, in our political economy, there exist two neighboring tribes, sharing common interests but separated by cultural and language barriers. On one side of the border there is the academy, particularly social scientists, who work to assess the costs and benefits of public policies, actual and possible. On the other side are the policymakers, including elected officials as well as those who work at various government agencies. Folks on the academy side generally feel that the policymakers would make better policy if they paid more attention to academic work. Meanwhile, policymakers often look across that divide desiring that academic work pay more attention to the practical realities of policymaking. Like Moynihan himself, Alan Blinder is that rare person who both transcends this barrier and recognizes its significance. As he made clear to the Senate during his confirmation process to become Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve, "Academic economists are often aloof from practical policy debates; but I have not been."2And he has regularly called on his academic colleagues to "train their powerful tools on real-world issues instead of chasing intellectual will-o'-the-wisps."3 Alan's academic work is a testimony to those principles. He has used the powerful tools of economics to address the critical policy topics of our time. From his pathbreaking work on the great stagflation of the 1970s,4through his analysis of central bank structure, independence, and communications,5to his research on financial crises6and his masterful summary of the past 60 years of monetary and fiscal policy,7Alan's work is always policy relevant, rigorous, and crystal clear. Alan has also been a top monetary policymaker, in addition to advising Presidents, Fed Chairs and numerous other officials on both a formal and informal basis. But his work goes beyond his excellence as a member of both the academic and policymaker tribes. Alan's life's work has featured a continuous effort to foster greater understanding and communication across the divide. To illustrate this, I will close with two broad categories of engagement that have been hallmarks of Alan's career. The first is Alan's work addressing the academy–policy divide itself. Two of his books, published 30 years apart, show his career-long focus answering this question: How can social science, and particularly economics, support good public policies? First inHard Heads, Soft Hearts,he articulates the problems these groups have in communicating and working with each other. He provides guidance and examples of success and failure while advocating an economic philosophy that combines "profound respect for the virtues of free markets with profound concern for those the market leaves behind."8He restated that philosophy more recently inAdvice and Dissent,in which he catalogs his own experience trying to bridge that gap, outlines what that experience has taught him, and gives additional direction "toward more useful economic advice met by less political dissent."9 The second category is Alan's engagement with the broader American public. He is the rare public figure who speaks fluently in both English and "Economics," and both audiences rightly consider him a native speaker. A natural teacher, Alan has communicated clearly and accessibly over the years with a wide range of audiences, bringing to bear facts, insights and lessons from history and policymaking. His countless newspaper columns, broadcast interviews and many books do more than clearly explain the economic issues of the day. Through them, Alan has managed to make economics both fascinating and essential to an extraordinarily wide audience. That is doubtless due in part to his habit of serving up the substance with a healthy dose of humor. Whether it is an academic article on the economics of brushing teeth,10a dinner talk outlining critical issues for central bankers with the help of Gilbert and Sullivan,11or the general wit on display in any of his regular columns, Alan's style enlivens even the most technical and dry topics. Moynihan surely would have approved. A personal note. Over the span of four decades, and counting, for many policymakers from different sectors of the political forest, and for me personally, Alan Blinder has been a friend, a source of good advice, a supporter, an insightful critic, a role model, and a wise soul. In short, a mensch. His published writings as an academic economist are essential to our work, and beyond count. The same is true of the friendships he has forged. He embodies so much of what many policymakers aspire to in his commitment to hard-headed analysis, tempered by a soft heart, that supports good public policy that benefits all Americans. Thank you. I am delighted and honored to introduce Professor Alan Blinder of Princeton University, this year's winner of the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Prize. 1. See American Academy of Political and Social Science (2022),"The Moynihan Prize,"webpage, paragraph 1.Return to text 2. See Alan S. Blinder (1994),"Attachment to Senate Banking Questionnaire,"inNominations of Alan S. Blinder, Steven M.H. Wallman, and Philip N. Diehl, hearing before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,U.S. Senate, May 6, Senate Hearing 103-611, 103 Cong. (Washington: Government Printing Office), p. 54.Return to text 3. See Alan S. Blinder (1997), "What Central Bankers Could Learn from Academics—and Vice Versa,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 11 (Spring), p. 17.Return to text 4. See Alan S. Blinder (1979),Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation(New York: Academic Press).Return to text 5. See Alan S. Blinder (1998),Central Banking in Theory and Practice(PDF)(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press); Alan Blinder, Charles Goodhart, Philipp Hildebrand, David Lipton, and Charles Wyplosz (2001),How Do Central Banks Talk?Geneva Reports on the World Economy 3 (Geneva: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies); and Alan S. Blinder (2004),The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press).Return to text 6. See Alan S. Blinder (2013),After the Music Stopped: The Financial Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead(New York: Penguin Press).Return to text 7. See Alan S. Blinder (2022),A Monetary and Fiscal History of the United States, 1961–2021(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).Return to text 8. See Alan S. Blinder (1987),Hard Heads, Soft Hearts: Tough-Minded Economics for a Just Society(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company), p. 23.Return to text 9. Alan S. Blinder (2018),Advice and Dissent: Why America Suffers When Economics and Politics Collide(New York: Basic Books), p. 308.Return to text 10. See Alan S. Blinder (1974), "The Economics of Brushing Teeth,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 82 (July–August), pp. 887–91.Return to text 11. See Alan S. Blinder (2000),"Critical Issues for Modern Major Central Bankers," (PDF)paper presented at "Monetary Policy-Making under Uncertainty," a conference organized by the European Central Bank and the Center for Financial Studies of the University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, December 3, 1999, pp. 64–74.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on August 21 and September 20, 2023. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on September 19–20, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 19-20, 2023:HTML|PDF
Governor Christopher J. Waller At "The Legacy of Bennett McCallum and Lessons for Monetary Policy Today," a conference sponsored by the Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Washington, D.C. It is a pleasure to be here to honor the legacy of Bennett McCallum by discussing his work on monetary policy. Over the years, I was fortunate to cross paths with Ben several times—from when I was a young academic economist to when I was research director at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. But, like many of you, most of my exposure to Ben McCallum's thinking has consisted of reading, and learning from, his writings on monetary policy. Ben was an influential researcher who focused on a number of topics that are key to monetary policy, some of them highlighted in today's panel sessions, including policy rules, instruments, and targets. When I was an academic, these were research interests that I shared with Ben. More recently, since I became a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the same issues have been at the forefront of my work, as I will explain in my remarks today. I will cover these issues in the context of discussing broad developments in U.S. monetary policy over the past quarter-century.1In doing so, I'm motivated by McCallum's 1999 paper "Recent Developments in Monetary Policy Analysis: The Roles of Theory and Evidence," which was a review of the previous 25 years.2In my remarks, I'll first talk about changes that have taken place since the 1990s in the way in which the FOMC has conducted policy. Then I'll turn to a discussion of monetary policy rules, how Ben thought about them, their use as an input into policymakers' decisions, and the choice of instruments and targets in policy rules. Developments in Monetary Policy from 1998 to 2023McCallum's review, which was largely written in 1998, contrasted monetary policy analysis in 1973 and 1998. In 1973, many economies were adjusting to the demise of the Bretton Woods international monetary system, and their domestic monetary policy regimes were starting to develop alongside floating exchange rates as well as the first oil shock that materialized during that year. In the U.S., continued dissatisfaction with economic performance—particularly high inflation—led to the restrictive monetary policy implemented by Paul Volcker from 1979 to 1982. The disinflation delivered by this policy was followed by greatly improved overall economic performance in the period that came to be known as the Great Moderation. The Great Moderation was also associated, in the era of Alan Greenspan's leadership of the Federal Reserve, with inflation moving down further, to rates consistent with price stability. Consequently, by the time of McCallum's 1998 retrospective, U.S. monetary policy had established a track record that was held in very high regard. It was widely believed that the Fed had lost credibility in the 1970s in terms of its willingness to fight inflation. Chairman Volcker's actions restored the Fed's credibility. Following the Volcker disinflation, economic research focused on the idea that monetary policy strategies would be fully effective only if they were credible. This idea led to an intensified debate about "rules versus discretion." The issue was how to maintain the basis for U.S. monetary policy that Volcker had created. As I'll discuss further, what was needed was a way to maintain the credibility of the institution, as opposed to relying on the credibility of an individual Fed Chair. One approach was for the FOMC to commit to following a policy rule and explicit policy targets, combined with communication of its policy rule to the public. And this approach was a key aspect of Ben McCallum's work. In the 25 years since 1998, there have been numerous changes in U.S. monetary policy arrangements. These have included several important reforms that were substantially along the lines advocated by Ben and others. In multiple ways, the FOMC's policy framework has become much more explicit. At the end of 2007, the FOMC began publishing a quarterly Summary of Economic Projections, collecting information on individual meeting participants' forecasts. Then, in January 2012, the FOMC issued a Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy—also known as our consensus statement. The consensus statement has been reaffirmed every year and revised several times. From its inception, it made the price-stability goal that is part of our congressional mandate more concrete by indicating that Federal Reserve policymakers interpret it as a 2 percent longer-run inflation rate (in the personal consumption expenditures price index). In 2011, Ben Bernanke initiated the practice of postmeeting press conferences, which under Chair Powell's leadership now follow every FOMC meeting. In the summer of 2020, FOMC participants released a revised consensus statement that further elaborated their interpretation of the dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability and how the Committee would pursue those objectives. The new statement explicitly recognized the policy tools of asset purchases and forward guidance on the federal funds rate. These tools were developed during the period, which started in late 2008, in which the federal funds rate was at the effective lower bound (ELB), and they were used again during the new ELB episode that began in March 2020. As many observers have noted over the years, the introduction of the 2 percent inflation objective and other formalizations of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy framework actually took place well after disinflation had been achieved under Volcker and consolidated under Greenspan. It might be asked why—with price stability secured by around the mid-1990s—these formalizations were thought necessary. The answer lies in the fact that a well-understood monetary policy regimeis needed to make price stability and anchored inflation expectations durable features of the economic environment.3Communicating key characteristics of the regime—including the numerical inflation target and policymakers' reaction function—makes it concrete and transparent in the eyes of the general public while also enhancing the central bank's credibility and the effectiveness of monetary policy. In this connection, the design of modern central bank policy regimes has drawn importantly on the literature on monetary policy rules. It is no coincidence that the period in the 1990s and 2000s of major strides in central bank transparency, frameworks, and communications took place alongside a resurgence of interest in research on monetary policy rules. The literature on monetary policy rules and on inflation targeting provided insights about how the U.S. monetary policy framework could achieve our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. And we have made use of those insights. By setting out a long-run inflation goal, while indicating that we take maximum employment as a long-term variable largely determined by nonmonetary factors, we make clear that we do not view our mandate as licensing us to seek unsustainably high levels of real output through bouts of loose monetary policy. As the literature on time consistency shows, not only would such monetary policy looseness sacrifice the achievement of long-run price stability, it would also not even deliver higher output in the long run.4Ben McCallum once summarized the consensus as follows: "The pragmatic argument for inflation targeting begins with the proposition that, from a long-run (i.e., steady state) perspective, monetary policy has a dominating influence on an economy's (average) inflation rate and a negligible influence on its rate of unemployment or output relative to capacity. This proposition has wide support among central bankers and also within the academic community."5 The benefits of an explicit, transparent policy regime are brought out clearly by our recent experience. When the FOMC began raising the federal funds rate in March 2022 to tame inflation, it used forward guidance to make clear our intention to reach a policy stance that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation back to 2 percent. I believe that this guidance has made our policy actions more effective. The FOMC's Reaction Function and the Analysis of Monetary Policy RulesForward guidance and the postmeeting statement are major means by which the FOMC is able to communicate to households, businesses, and financial markets key aspects of our reaction function. The reaction function connects decisions on our main policy instrument—the federal funds rate—to inflation and other key variables, such as data on labor market conditions. The reaction function relates to a key research interest of Ben McCallum's: policy rules. Three key messages that McCallum stressed regarding rules have become widely accepted. The first message is that rules can be countercyclical. McCallum became interested in policy rules at a time when those rules were closely associated with what is termed "nonactivist" policymaking—defined as approaches that did not involve the monetary authority responding to fluctuations in real variables such as output and employment. At that time, the research literature focused on what was known as thekpercent rule, implying a fixed rate of growth for the money supply. This rule was intended to pin down the longer-run inflation rate, but it precluded monetary policy responses to the state of the business cycle. In contrast, McCallum, as well as other economists of his generation such as Stanley Fischer and John Taylor, argued that it was appropriate to consider both nonactivist policy rules and rules that were deliberately countercyclical or activist.6A policy rule, according to this view, could respond to movements in output, employment, and inflation in a systematic way, using a formula intended to be applicable over time and in different circumstances.7Today it is widely accepted by economists that monetary policy rules can be activist rules. A second, related message of McCallum's work was that different rule specifications can concretely characterize differences among economists on appropriate monetary policy. In the 1970s, the whole notion of policy rules was closely associated with advocates of monetarism and rational expectations, with Keynesian economics being seen as entailing opposition to policy rules. McCallum opposed this dichotomy and observed, "To me it seems quite clear that debates between economists—for example, Milton Friedman and James Tobin—are about the desirability of different policy rules."8That is, McCallum wanted to represent alternative perspectives on monetary policy as different rule specifications, and he urged the study of rules as a means of understanding various policy prescriptions and their consequences for the economy. This perspective on rules has also become standard. Indeed, the box on monetary policy rules that regularly appears in the Federal Reserve Board'sMonetary Policy Reportprovides a menu of policy rules designed to reflect a variety of views about the appropriate formulation of monetary policy.9Similarly, multiple rule prescriptions and the possible implications of alternative rules for economic outcomes have, for many years, been a regular part of the briefing materials that go to policymakers before each FOMC meeting, allowing policymakers to incorporate these prescriptions into their thinking and discussions.10 A third message of McCallum's work on rules was that there were merits in actual policy following "rule-like" behavior.11He recognized that policy rules were not likely to be used literally or mechanically as a means of deciding on monetary policy actions. Even so, McCallum believed that rules provided information about the responses to the state of the economy that were likely to be associated with more successful policymaking. According to this reasoning, the prescriptions coming from policy rules provide valuable benchmarks. As McCallum put it, "Actual central banks are unlikely to officially adopt such rules, of course, but consideration of their implications could nevertheless prove helpful in practice."12 McCallum also noted that this idea was strongly advanced by John Taylor in his 1993 paper introducing the Taylor rule.13It's worth looking at some features of the Taylor rule, as this will help bring out the connections between the policy rules literature and Federal Reserve practice. My discussion of these features will underline the fact that it is today widely accepted that the predictability of policymakers' reaction function strengthens the stabilizing properties of monetary policy. In that sense, policymakers understand the value of making decisions in "rule-like" ways. First, I will discuss the Taylor rule formula's left-hand side—its specification of the instrument. I will then turn to its right-hand side—the target variables to which the instrument responds. The Monetary Policy InstrumentAs McCallum observed, "Taylor's paper (1993) succeeded brilliantly in interesting central bankers in the consideration of rule-guided policy making."14In particular, Taylor's article helped bring monetary policy research into better alignment with central bank practice in putting the focus squarely on interest rate rules. Much monetary policy analysis in academia had considered rules in which the policy instrument was a monetary or reserves aggregate. As I expect most of you know, this was a matter on which McCallum's research had two branches. On the one hand, the rule that McCallum himself advanced in a number of papers in the 1980s and 1990s was a rule for the monetary base and was designed to improve on thekpercent monetary-growth rule by introducing countercyclical responses and allowing for shifts in money demand.15But, on the other hand, he also produced fundamental analytical work showing that interest rate rules were viable, with his 1981 paper establishing that such rules could provide an anchor on the economy's nominal variables.16Consequently, McCallum was receptive when the Taylor rule became a baseline reaction function in monetary policy analysis. Central banks were likewise receptive to the analysis of interest rate rules—and the Taylor rule in particular. Their favorable reaction was driven by two factors. First, after the experience of monetary targeting, central banks were disillusioned with policy analysis that was focused on monetary aggregates. Second, interest rate rules were policy relevant because these rules were expressed in terms of the short-term interest rate on which central banks actually made decisions. As McCallum put it, "The fact is that actual central banks in industrial countries conduct monetary policy in a manner that is much more accurately depicted by writing [the interest rate] as the instrument."17Reflecting this reality, all the rules considered in ourMonetary Policy Reportare interest rate rules.18 Monetary Policy TargetsAn additional attraction of the Taylor rule is that the right-hand-side variables correspond closely to economic variables for which central banks have targets: inflation and an estimate of the state of real aggregate demand or labor market conditions. I'll make a few remarks about considerations related to these targets. When it comes to the specification of the inflation term in a policy rule, in the U.S. case, it's important that the inflation target is consistent with our dual mandate, which includes a price-stability goal. In 1993, John Taylor suggested that a 2 percent inflation objective characterized the Federal Reserve's behavior in the early Greenspan years pretty well. This goal subsequently became official. In 2012, as I noted earlier, the Committee made a goal of 2 percent inflation its formal interpretation of the price-stability objective. The choice of a 2 percent longer-run goal reflected a broad consensus that this rate corresponded to effective price stability in the United States. Around the world, too, inflation-targeting central banks view 2 percent as the rate corresponding to price stability. The FOMC has further judged that 2 percent is the inflation goal most consistent with achievement of our dual mandate. We have reaffirmed this numerical goal repeatedly since 2012, and, in tightening monetary policy since early last year, we've made clear that we're determined to bring inflation down to 2 percent. In considering the appropriate monetary policy response needed to return inflation to 2 percent, I find it useful to draw on the findings of the policy rules literature. These findings include the "Taylor principle" notion that deviations of inflation from target should likely be met by a more than one-for-one response of the federal funds rate—a response that helps ensure that the real interest rate is increased in policy tightenings.19 The other part of our dual mandate is the goal of maximum employment. Reflecting the fact that this goal refers to the labor market rather than economic activity, the interest rate rules considered in theMonetary Policy Reportput the real target in terms of an unemployment gap, rather than an output gap. On the matter of how this rule should be used as an input into policymaking, the main thing that I would stress is that there are multiple dimensions of labor market conditions, as well as considerable uncertainty about the level of maximum employment. As a result, caution is justified in having monetary policy responding to gap estimates. I therefore see merit in McCallum's warning against monetary policy responding strongly to the output gap.20In this connection, Athanasios Orphanides's research suggests that estimates of the first difference of economic slack (or excess demand pressure) may be less vulnerable to mismeasurement than the corresponding estimates of the level.21These considerations imply that the prescriptions of the first-difference interest rate rule—which also appear in theMonetary Policy Report—serve as a useful crosscheck on the prescriptions of more standard variants of the Taylor rule. ConclusionStaying on the topic of policy targets, I think it is worth concluding by emphasizing an important respect in which things havenotchanged since 1998 when Ben McCallum reviewed monetary policy developments. He noted, "Overall, the most fundamental change since the 1970s has been the assumption of responsibility by central banks for performance in terms of inflation rates. In 1998, it would be extremely surprising to run across a central bank statement that discussed medium-term inflation prospects in a manner suggesting that these are unaffected by monetary policy behavior."22That difference between 1973 and 1998 is also an important contrast between 1973, when U.S. monetary policy failed to play the part that it needed to play in restoring price stability, and the FOMC's behavior over the past two years. Price stability is a primary responsibility of the Federal Reserve. This is why we have taken forceful steps aimed at reducing inflation—and why we will stay on the job to achieve our objective. ReferencesBarro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 91 (August), pp. 589–610. Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023).Monetary Policy Report (PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, June. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. Cochrane, John H. (2023).The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer (1978).Macroeconomics.New York: McGraw-Hill. King, Mervyn (1997). "Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 39 (June), pp. 81-97. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-91. McCallum, Bennett T. (1980). "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic Stabilization Policy: An Overview,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 12 (November, Part 2), pp. 716–46. ——— (1981). "Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule and Rational Expectations,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 8 (November), pp. 319–29. ——— (1987). "The Case for Rules in the Conduct of Monetary Policy: A Concrete Example,"Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv,vol. 123 (3), pp. 415-29. ——— (1993). "Specification and Analysis of a Monetary Policy Rule for Japan,"Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, vol. 11 (November), pp. 1-45. ——— (1997). "Inflation Targeting in Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and in General," in Iwao Kuroda, ed.,Towards More Effective Monetary Policy.New York: St. Martin's Press, pp. 211–41. ——— (1999a). "Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Macroeconomics,vol. 1C. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1483-530. ——— (1999b). "Recent Developments in Monetary Policy Analysis: The Roles of Theory and Evidence (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 7088. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. ——— (2001). "Should Monetary Policy Respond Strongly to Output Gaps?"American Economic Review,vol. 91 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 258-62. Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). "The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2002). "Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 33 (2), pp. 63-118. Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil A. Wallace (1975). " 'Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 83 (April), pp. 241-54. Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999). "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 43 (June), pp. 607-54. Taylor, John B. (1980). "Recent Developments in the Theory of Stabilization Policy," in Laurence H. Meyer, ed.,Stabilization Policies: Lessons from the '70s and Implications for the '80s,proceedings of the fourth annual conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and the Center for the Study of American Business at Washington University. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 1-40, available athttps://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/1980/04/01/recent-developments-in-the-theory-of-stabilization-policy. ——— (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. Volcker, Paul A. (1980). "Statement [and testimony] of Paul A. Volcker, Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System," inFederal Reserve's Second Monetary Policy Report for 1980, hearings before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,U.S. Senate, July 22, 1980, 96 Cong. Washington: Government Printing Office, pp. 96–141. Woodford, Michael (2003).Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the FOMC or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. See McCallum (1999b).Return to text 3. Paul Volcker essentially recognized this point in congressional testimony of July 22, 1980, when he observed that "we want to have a firm monetary standard. . . [one that is] tied to the general stability of prices" (Volcker, 1980, p. 134).Return to text 4. See Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983). As already indicated, the advent of explicit inflation targeting in several countries helped motivate the changes made to the Federal Reserve's policy arrangements. But the adoption of inflation targeting abroad was itself partly driven by the analytical considerations that I am highlighting. For discussions of how the early practice of inflation targeting in various countries incorporated these considerations, see, for example, King (1997), Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999), and Svensson (1999).Return to text 5. See McCallum (1997, p. 224).Return to text 6. See Dornbusch and Fischer (1978, p. 290), Taylor (1980, pp. 31-32), and McCallum (1980, 1987).Return to text 7. See McCallum (1987, p. 416).Return to text 8. See McCallum (1980, p. 725).Return to text 9. See, most recently, the box"Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment" in Board of Governors (2023, pp. 44–46).Return to text 10. Examples of such materials can be found in the publicly available Tealbooks (through 2017), which are provided on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm.Return to text 11. See McCallum (1980, 1999a).Return to text 12. See McCallum (1993, p. 39).Return to text 13. See Taylor (1993).Return to text 14. See McCallum (1999b, p. 16).Return to text 15. See, for example, McCallum (1987, 1993, 1999a).Return to text 16. This work was in response to the negative judgment made on interest rate rules by Sargent and Wallace (1975). See Woodford (2003, p. 45) and Cochrane (2023, p. 416) for discussions of McCallum's (1981) result in the context of dynamic general equilibrium analysis.Return to text 17. See McCallum (1999b, p. 24).Return to text 18. In addition, interest rate rules, largely consisting of variants of the Taylor rule, have been found useful in characterizing earlier eras of U.S. monetary policy. See Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000).Return to text 19. A detailed analysis of the Taylor principle appears in Woodford (2003). The Federal Reserve Board website has a discussion of the Taylor principle in the context of "Principles for the Conduct of Monetary Policy".Return to text 20. See McCallum (2001).Return to text 21. See, for example, Orphanides and Williams (2002) and Orphanides (2003).Return to text 22. See McCallum (1999b, p. 11).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Forecasters Club of New York, New York, New York Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you. I would like to talk with you today about the intersection of my two roles at the Federal Reserve as the Vice Chair for Supervision at the Federal Reserve Board and as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1In particular, I'll focus on the interaction of monetary policy and financial stability policy. Views on Monetary Policy and Current ConditionsFirst, my views on current monetary policy. I am squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. I strongly agree with the point that Chair Powell has made often, which is that without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. Price stability is crucial to achieving a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. I joined the FOMC last year at a time when the headline CPI inflation was peaking at about 9 percent, and we had begun our policy response. There has been a lot of progress since tightening the stance of policy began last year. In August, the 12-month change in CPI inflation was about 3-3/4 percent. The Committee has raised the federal funds rate 5-1/4 percentage points while also reducing the Fed's securities holdings by about $1 trillion. Our strong measures have ensured that inflation expectations remain well anchored. While inflation has been moderating, incoming data on economic activity have shown considerably more resilience than I had expected. We are being helped by improvements in supply. I now see a higher probability than I did previously of the U.S. economy achieving a return to price stability without the degree of job losses that have typically accompanied significant monetary policy tightening cycles. However, the historical record cautions that this outcome could be quite difficult to achieve. Of course, the labor market is tight and the data show that employment continued to expand through August, but incoming data also suggest we are making progress on bringing labor demand and supply back into better balance. Job growth has moderated while labor force participation has continued to improve. Immigration has increased, and job vacancies have moved down toward a more normal level. My baseline projection is for real GDP growth to moderate to somewhat below its potential rate over the next year as restrictive monetary policy and tighter financial conditions restrain economic activity, and I expect this below-trend growth will be associated with some further softening in the labor market. As we watch how conditions evolve, I remain highly attuned to risks to achieving both components of our mandate. There is a robust debate about the lags of monetary policy transmission; how long it takes for past tightening to come into full effect. While these lags are difficult to estimate, I expect that the full effects of past tightening are yet to come in the months ahead. I strongly agree with what Chair Powell has said about where we are in the tightening cycle. Given how far we have come, we are now at a point where we can proceed carefully as we determine the extent of monetary policy restriction that is needed. In my view, the most important question at this point is not whether an additional rate increase is needed this year or not, but rather how long we will need to hold rates at a sufficiently restrictive level to achieve our goals. I expect it will take some time. I will continue to evaluate a range of incoming data as I make my assessments at upcoming meetings. As a part of this, I continue to track the cost and availability of credit to the economy, as I will discuss later in these remarks. Monetary Policy and Financial StabilityNow let me turn to my focus today, which is the interaction of monetary policy and financial stability. Monetary policy affects the cost and quantity of credit in the economy, usually in a broad-based and gradual fashion. Financial instability, however, can affect the cost and quantity of credit in an acute and abrupt fashion. Both forces have an effect on economic activity, as the flow of credit to businesses and households is crucial for spending, hiring, and production, underpinning economic growth. Financial stability was a key motivation for the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913.2Although the term "financial stability" wasn't in the vernacular at the time, the Fed was established in part to provide "an elastic currency"—a major concern in an era when periodic strains in the banking sector resulted in currency hoarding and widespread bank runs and failures, causing severe harm to our economy. For much of our subsequent history, however, the Federal Reserve tended to consider financial stability and monetary policy separately.3That perspective changed considerably in the years after the Global Financial Crisis, which had many implications for how we think about financial stability and the role of the Federal Reserve. The Dodd-Frank Act was pivotal in reducing financial-sector vulnerabilities that contributed to the crisis, as were attendant reforms to capital and liquidity rules that strengthened the resiliency of the banking system. Financial Stability Considerations in a Low-Rate EnvironmentAfter the Global Financial Crisis, the Federal Reserve kept interest rates low for years to revive a badly damaged economy. Researchers, market participants, and policymakers took note of the potential for very low interest rates to encourage investors to "reach for yield"—that is, to take increased risk in pursuing higher returns on their investments. This behavior can include taking on increased interest rate, credit, and liquidity risk. In some ways, investor reach for yield is an indication that monetary policy is helping stimulate economic activity. Lowering borrowing costs increases the expected return on any investment that is financed. This means that lower rates result in more investments or projects getting the green light. As a result, more people get jobs as economic activity increases. But in that environment of record low interest rates, and with the ravages of the financial crisis a fresh memory, people rightly wondered whether the incentive to reach for yield would drive excessive risk-taking, leading to a buildup in vulnerabilities that could ultimately threaten the stability of the financial system and the economy. Were those risks so considerable that financial stability concerns should be taken into consideration in making monetary policy decisions?4At the same time, some risks were moving outside the banking system, leading some to worry that measures to build resilience at banks would miss these risks. Indeed, as then-Governor Jeremy Stein famously pointed out, monetary policy "gets in all the cracks" and therefore could push back against excessive risk-taking, not only in banks, but across the financial system.5Despite these concerns, financial stability risks were contained until the pandemic. Financial Stability Consideration of Moving from Low Rates to Rising RatesThe pandemic resulted in an unprecedented mismatch between demand and supply, both here and abroad, and these forces were the initial impetus for high inflation. The shift from an environment of generally low and slowly adjusting rates to the rapid and near-simultaneous tightening of monetary policy around the world that began last year set the stage for additional stresses in the financial system. For example, in the United Kingdom, an initial jump in the yields on longer-maturity government bonds was amplified by distress at liability-driven investment funds. These funds had become popular with many pension funds during the low-rate period and faced a liquidity squeeze, as they had to rapidly post collateral to cover derivatives losses. This led to widespread disruptions in the gilt market last fall, requiring the Bank of England to undertake a temporary and targeted program of purchases of long-dated government bonds.6 Here in the United States, starting in 2022, the FOMC began a period of rapid and substantial increases in the federal funds target range to combat inflation that was much too high. While most banks were well positioned to handle rate increases, higher interest rates had a severe effect on the balance sheets of banks that had not managed their interest rate risk appropriately. This mismanagement came into acute focus when Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) announced it had realized a large loss from the sale of securities that had declined in value and that it intended to raise capital to fill that hole. Uninsured depositors abruptly ran on the bank—with actual and planned flight totaling roughly 85 percent of its deposits within 24 hours—and it failed instantly. SVB's failure caused widespread contagion that led quickly to the failure of Signature Bank and eventually to the failure of First Republic Bank, and it posed acute stress on other banks. The stress only abated after invocation of the systemic risk exception that permitted the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to protect all depositors (including uninsured depositors) of the failed banks and the creation of the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) using the Fed's emergency lending authorities. The BTFP allowed banks to get access to Fed liquidity based on the par value of their high-quality securities at fixed rates for up to a year. This response helped calm conditions in the banking sector. Deposit flows returned to normal, and the prospect of a widespread and acute bank credit contraction receded. Such a contraction could well have harmed the economy and even triggered a recession. Indeed, one recent study looked at data for 46 countries over 150 years and found that episodes of bank stress are frequently followed by significant drops in bank lending and economic activity that persist for many years.7Despite the effectiveness of our response to the March stress events, the question again arose whether monetary policy goals were in conflict with financial stability. Given these historical experiences, I think it is particularly important that we watch closely how both monetary policy and the effects of the March banking stress are affecting bank behavior and the provision of credit to the economy. Recent data are consistent with pressures on banks easing relative to March. Nevertheless, although deposit volatility has abated, some banks have had to turn to higher-cost funding sources to make up for lost deposits. And core loan growth appears to be relatively stagnant in banks of all sizes. While low loan growth can be explained in part by weaker demand for loans in response to higher costs of credit, it is also driven in part by banks tightening their standards, as they reported they were doing in the past several releases of the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices.8 As we continue to track developments, we are also continuing to learn from this episode. As I have discussed in other remarks, as well as in congressional testimony, we are using lessons learned from the March episode to consider how we can both enhance our supervision and adjust our regulations as appropriate to address risks at the institutions over which we have supervisory and regulatory authority. A stable financial system is a necessary condition for sustainably achieving the FOMC's monetary policy goals of maximum employment and stable prices. It is critical that banks have enough capital to remain resilient to those stresses. The safety and soundness of the banking sector is paramount in achieving both our monetary policy and financial stability goals. Everyone in America depends on a safe and stable financial system that channels credit to businesses so they can grow and hire workers, and to households so they can deal with the ups and downs in the economy and invest in the future. Of course, major portions of the financial sector are not subject to federal prudential regulation. As I noted in a speech on bank capital earlier this year, we also need to worry about how risk outside the banking sector can threaten financial stability, as stress in broader financial markets is often transmitted to the banking system.9So we need to take a broad view of financial stability. Perspectives from the Literature and the Policy DebateRecent experience lines up with academic research. I see three basic findings.10First, when financial intermediaries, such as banks, play the important role of channeling funds from savers to borrowers, they frequently do so through various forms of maturity and credit transformation. This transformation results in the creation of risk on their balance sheets. Issuing short-term, liquid liabilities (including uninsured deposits) to fund longer-term, less liquid assets is one example of maturity transformation. These assets, such as loans, can have a credit risk component as well. These types of activities are key aspects of how the financial system supports the economy. But they can also lead to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities. And, of course, banks also engage in trading activities with their own set of exposures to market risk, a concern for regulation and supervision. The second conclusion of researchers is that such financial vulnerabilities can amplify the effects of adverse shocks to the economy, as witnessed during the Global Financial Crisis. And third, there is some evidence that monetary policy can affect financial vulnerabilities. I described, for example, how a low-rate environment can affect investors' inclination to reach for yield and how a rising rate environment can expose poor asset-liability management. While there is some agreement among researchers about how monetary policy can affect the accumulation of financial vulnerabilities, there is more debate about whether monetary policy decisionmaking should be affected by concerns about financial stability. One view is that there is often a discernable tradeoff between the objectives of monetary policy and financial stability, and that monetary policy decisions should consider the consequences for the stability of the financial system.11Another view is that there should be a strict separation of monetary policy and financial stability policy. According to this perspective, these goals are often complementary, particularly over the longer run, and even in cases when they do clash, the conflicts are short lived and better dealt with through specific and separate sets of tools. For example, Ben Bernanke, Don Kohn, and Lars Svensson, among others, have argued that the likely costs of using monetary policy to address financial stability risks outweigh the benefits.12My view is somewhere in the middle of these two perspectives. Let me explain what I mean. Monetary policy is a blunt tool, affecting every individual, investor, and business. In contrast, financial stability threats can emerge from discrete parts of the financial system. Correctly calibrating monetary policy to target a financial vulnerability specific to one part of the financial system is likely not possible. Moreover, a monetary policy response, even to a broad-based search for yield, might require an increase in rates so large that it causes broad-based economic harm.13In addition, if a segment of the financial system comes under stress but does not affect broader credit conditions, easing funding costs to the entire economy through monetary policy may not be appropriate. Targeted supervisory and regulatory action is often more effective. If financial stress is so large that it causes a macroeconomic downturn, then monetary policy and financial stability policy are well aligned, and the objective function can be clearly defined as restoring economic growth. Therefore, monetary policymakers are generally best served by focusing squarely on their macroeconomic objectives. That said, policymakers need to be cognizant of what is happening in the financial system and of any accumulation of financial stability risks, as these risks can be a threat to achieving the dual mandate. As the first line of defense, where we have authority, supervision and regulation are best positioned to address vulnerabilities in the financial system as they emerge. If these tools are properly deployed, these actions may be sufficient. But sometimes they won't be. Turning back to the SVB example, the bank failed because of a textbook case of mismanagement, particularly of interest rate and liquidity risk.14The result was that the firm's collapse created financial stability risks that required emergency intervention. Monetary policy cannot be indifferent to financial stability risks. When financial stability events materialize, they can significantly affect both the price and quantity of credit to the economy. At that point, financial stability problems become a monetary policy concern, as they can adversely affect the flow of credit to households and businesses as well as depress economic activity. As I mentioned earlier, in its deliberations about monetary policy, the FOMC considers how credit conditions are affecting the economy. We receive regular briefings on financial stability risks, briefings that I find hugely valuable. But we also need to be conscious of the inherent limits in our ability to foresee how the financial system will respond to shocks given its complexity and evolving nature. Our ability to address financial stability risks has been greatly improved by the reforms of the Dodd-Frank Act and enhanced bank capital and liquidity requirements. But we can expect that the economy remains vulnerable to unanticipated shocks that affect both financial stability and economic growth. While continuing to bolster the resilience of the financial sector where we have authority to do so, we must also continue to monitor how emerging financial-sector risks may threaten the broader economy. Concluding Thoughts on Federal Reserve Liquidity ProvisionI would like to wrap up my thoughts today by discussing one of the Federal Reserve's oldest tools of both monetary policy and financial stability: the discount window. I will again harken back to our founding and note that providing backstop liquidity to banks is one of the original purposes of the Federal Reserve System.15 Today, the discount window plays an important role. Currently, the primary credit rate, which is the rate available to banks in generally sound financial condition, is set at the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. In this way, this tool, as well as the standing repo facility, which also has a rate currently set at the top of the target range, can help keep the federal funds rate within the target range established by the FOMC if pressures arise in short-term funding markets.16For the discount window to support rate control, however, banks need to be willing and prepared to use it when other means of supporting their funding and liquidity—such as tapping the federal funds market—are more expensive. I have been working to ensure that eligible institutions know that supervisors expect them to be ready and willing to use the discount window. We recently published a joint-agency message on the importance of readiness to tap contingency funding sources, including the discount window.17 Readiness to use the discount window is also crucial when it comes to financial stability. When the system is hit with a shock that results in widespread stress, funding markets are often unable to effectively distribute liquidity. In these cases, the discount window can be particularly important both to the institutions that need liquidity and to the Federal Reserve's efforts to stop dysfunction from spreading and restore stability, but, again, only if banks do the work ahead of time and are ready and able to use it. As we saw in March, many banks found that having more than one option at the ready to monetize assets was important. Other sources of funds to banks, even the Federal Home Loan Banks, are dependent on private-sector financial market functioning to provide liquidity to their customers. When the market isn't working, such sources of funding and liquidity come under strain.18 In contrast, even when banks find that other sources of funds are not available, the discount window can provide liquidity to every eligible institution that is prepared to use it. In this way, the discount window is an important means of supporting financial stability. In conclusion, monetary policy needs to be cognizant of the risks that financial stress can lead to abrupt changes in the price and quantity of credit, and thus can cause significant harm to the real economy. At the same time, focusing monetary policy decisions on macroeconomic objectives and using other tools for financial stability is likely the most prudent path. Even as we address the lessons from past financial stress, the Federal Reserve must be vigilant about potential risks to financial stability that may lie ahead. Financial institutions need to have an array of both public and private contingent funding sources immediately available to weather a variety of conditions. Thank you, and I am happy to take questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. As Paul Volcker put it 40 years ago when testifying as Federal Reserve Chair, "the Federal Reserve, like any central bank, has a continuing and abiding interest in . . . the stability of the financial system in the broader sense. If you go back to history, that's really why the Federal Reserve was founded." See Paul Volcker (1983), "Panel Discussion," inProblems, Options, and Issues Currently Facing the Financial Services Industry and the Agencies that Regulate and Supervise These Entities, hearing before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,U.S. Senate, Apr. 26, Senate Hearing 98-142, 98 Cong. (Washington: Government Printing Office), p. 78. In addition, Robert Owen wrote, "It is the duty of the United States to provide a means by which the periodic panics which shake the American Republic and do it enormous injury shall be stopped." See Robert L. Owen (1919),The Federal Reserve Act: Its Origins and Principles(New York: Century Company).Return to text 3. See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke (2013), "A Century of US Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 27 (Fall), pp. 3–16.Return to text 4. Michael Woodford raised the issue in 2012; see Michael Woodford (2012), "Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability," NBER Working Paper Series 17967 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April). Among Fed policymakers, it was broached in 2013 by Narayana Kocherlakota and then dealt with more extensively in 2014 in speeches by Jeremy Stein and Janet Yellen; see Narayana Kocherlakota (2013), "Low Real Interest Rates," speech delivered at the 22nd Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, New York, April 18, Jeremy C. Stein (2014), "Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy Framework," speech delivered at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, March 21, Janet L. Yellen (2014), "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington, July 2.Return to text 5. See Jeremy C. Stein (2013), "Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, February 7.Return to text 6. See Bank of England (2022),Financial Stability Report(PDF)(London: BOE, December).Return to text 7. See Matthew Baron, Emil Verner, and Wei Xiong (2021), "Banking Crises without Panics,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 136 (February), pp. 51–113.Return to text 8. The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey is available on the Federal Reserve's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos.htm.Return to text 9. See Michael S. Barr (2023), "Holistic Capital Review," speech delivered at the Bipartisan Policy Center, Washington, July 10.Return to text 10. For a recent review and synthesis of the theoretical and empirical academic literatures, see Andrea Ajello, Nina Boyarchenko, Francois Gourio, and Andrea Tambalotti (2022), "Financial Stability Considerations for Monetary Policy: Theoretical Mechanisms," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), and Nina Boyarchenko, Giovanni Favara, and Moritz Schularick (2022), "Financial Stability Considerations for Monetary Policy: Empirical Evidence and Challenges," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-006 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).Return to text 11. See, for example, Jeremy C. Stein (2014), "Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy Framework," speech delivered at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, March 21, and Jeremy C. Stein (2021), "Can Policy Tame the Credit Cycle?"IMF Economic Review,vol. 69 (March), pp. 5–22.Return to text 12. See, for instance, Ben S. Bernanke (2015), "Should Monetary Policy Take into Account Risks to Financial Stability?" Brookings Institution, April 7, Don Kohn (2016), "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability (PDF)," speech delivered at Tsinghua University, Beijing, May 21, Lars E. O. Svensson (2017), "Cost–Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 90 (October), pp. 193–213.Return to text 13. See for example, Moritz Schularick, Lucas ter Steege, and Felix Ward (2021), "Leaning against the Wind and Crisis Risk,"American Economic Review: Insights,vol. 3 (June), pp. 199–214; Lars E. O. Svensson (2014), "Inflation Targeting and 'Leaning against the Wind,'"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (June), pp. 103–14.Return to text 14. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April 28). The Government Accountability Office's preliminary report and the Federal Reserve's Office of Inspector General's Material Loss Review similarly found weak risk management at SVB and inadequate supervisory responses given the firm's deficiencies. See Government Accountability Office (2023), "Preliminary Review of Agency Actions Related to March 2023 Bank Failures (PDF)," GAO-23-106736 (Washington: GAO, April), and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), "Material Loss Review of Silicon Valley Bank (PDF)," Evaluation Report 2023-SR-B-013 (Washington: Board of Governors, September 25).Return to text 15. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses," press release, March 15, Paul Warburg (1916), "The Reserve Problem and the Future of the Federal Reserve (PDF)," speech before the Convention of the American Bankers Association, Kansas City, September 29, Mark A. Carlson and David C. Wheelock (2015), "The Lender of Last Resort: Lessons from the Fed's First 100 Years," in Owen F. Humpage, ed.,Current Federal Reserve Policy under the Lens of Economic History: Essays to Commemorate the Federal Reserve System's Centennial(New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 49–101.Return to text 16. Committee discussions about the design of the standing repo facility can be found in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 15–16, 2021," press release, July 7.Return to text 17. See the "Addendum to the Interagency Policy Statement on Funding and Liquidity Risk Management: Importance of Contingency Funding Plans," which is available on the Federal Reserve's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20230728a1.pdf.Return to text 18. The events of September 11, 2001, are one example; see James J. McAndrews and Simon M. Potter (2002), "Liquidity Effects of the Events of September 11, 2001," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review,vol. 8 (November), pp. 59–79.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Stress Test Research Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. I'm here to offer my thoughts on the next steps for stress testing, and in particular why using multiple exploratory scenarios will help improve our understanding of risk in the banking system.1 The stress test as we know it today grew out of the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or SCAP, conducted in the heat of the global financial crisis. In the winter of 2008–09, markets had lost confidence in banks amid wide uncertainty about the future path of the economy and the losses banks could face. This prompted the Federal Reserve and Treasury to conduct a stress test to determine the health of the 19 largest banks under a severely adverse economic scenario and to publish the findings. The release of the results provided transparency about the status of the largest banks, made it easier for firms to re-capitalize themselves, and restarted the provision of credit to the economy that began the process of recovery. Following the success of this stress test, Congress mandated in the Dodd-Frank Act that the Federal Reserve conduct an annual stress test of large banks to determine whether those banks have sufficient capital to absorb losses under adverse economic conditions.2And today this test—as well as the data collection that supports it—is one of our primary tools to assess and to help ensure banks' resilience, in good times and bad. During periods of economic or financial uncertainty, stress tests can provide critical assessments of bank resilience to supervisors, the market, and policymakers. This transparency helps enable markets to function better in times of stress.3 Outside of stressful periods, stress tests can help to assess sufficient capitalization and improve supervisory insight into risks. The stress test also can provide transparency into the build-up of risks across banks. In our experience, the test results have given supervisors valuable information to provide feedback to individual firms and helped the Board assess the stability of the financial system. A recent study confirms this experience, finding that banks subject to the stress test were less exposed to common systemic risks.4In addition, the stress test helps to make capital requirements less susceptible to gaming by firms and therefore more likely to be set at adequate levels.5This is so because the design of the scenario can change based on our observations of growing risks in the system. The scenario framework, by using parameters that become stricter when the economy is stronger, also helps to avoid exacerbating the natural tendency for banks to take larger risks during good times and become highly risk averse during bad times.6Furthermore, stress tests change in response to improved modeling and evolving risks, so that the tests better estimate potential losses in a downturn. Over the past 14 years, we have learned from our experiences and continued to evolve the stress testing program. We have taken steps to increase the transparency of the stress testing program, including to publish an extensive description of our approach to model development, implementation, and validation, as well as our approach to scenario design.7In connection with each stress test, we disclose a detailed summary of the stress test methodology, and for several key portfolios, disclose our approach to modeling loss rates, summary statistics, and modeled loss rates.8In 2020, we adopted the stress capital buffer, which uses the results of the stress test to inform a firm's capital buffer requirements.9The program also provides banks with the opportunity to request reconsideration of their stress capital buffer. While our stress test is an important measure of the strength and resilience of the banking system, we must recognize that it does have limitations, as does any exercise. I'll walk through three limitations and explain how they can be at least partially mitigated by incorporating multiple exploratory scenarios into our stress test program. What I mean by an exploratory scenario is a scenario that is not used to set a firm's stress capital buffer requirement. I'll then describe how the Federal Reserve could use the results of exploratory scenarios to help ensure the banking system remains strong and resilient, by allowing us to better understand potential risks and improve our supervision of those banks. As we move forward, we must remain cognizant that none of us can predict future stressful events and their consequences with confidence. Limitations of Stress TestingFirst, the current stress test uses a single scenario that is focused on a credit-driven recession and single global market shock to test the financial condition of firms.10A single scenario cannot cover the range of plausible risks faced by all large banks. This has been confirmed time and time again, including in recent experience. The failures of three large banks last spring showed that acute banking strains can emerge even without a severe recession. Yet, conditions such as those recently experienced presented challenges for the design of the supervisory stress scenario. Most notably, the Federal Reserve's stress testing policy statement—which governs how the hypothetical scenarios are determined—requires that the severely adverse scenario include a rapid increase in the unemployment rate to at least 10 percent, as well as steep declines in house prices. Such conditions are historically associated with subdued inflation and a fall in interest rates. The fact that significant banking stress emerged in very different conditions underscores the limitations of our current stress testing processes. We also do not take into account second-order effects of stress within the financial system, which are channels that amplify the effects of the shocks hitting bank's balance sheets, leading to losses spreading throughout the financial system. A good example of this is the reaction of funding markets to stress at an individual firm or many firms. These network effects may result in losses across the system not fully captured by our stress tests. While the severely adverse scenario is calibrated to historical recessions that have included contagion, our stress tests may not fully capture the evolving interconnections in today's financial system. The second limitation involves our models. In developing supervisory models, Federal Reserve staff draw on economic research and industry practice; the models are also independently validated by a group of experts outside of the stress testing program. However, all models have limitations—they are generally trained on historical data and therefore may not be robust to structural breaks, such as a once-in-a-lifetime pandemic, or important changes in technology.11Expanding the range of risks captured in the stress test makes models more robust to these limitations but will not address them completely.12 The third limitation is how the stress test affects bank behavior. Using scenarios that test for the same underlying risks year after year could disincentivize firms from investing in their own risk management as the test becomes predictable, and may encourage concentration across the system in assets that receive comparably lighter treatment in the test. Additional exploratory stress test scenarios could allow supervisors to better probe the internal risk management of firms and assess whether they are holding sufficient capital for their risks.13We find that firms often use a large number of scenarios and shocks when running their own internal stress testing processes, and our regulatory counterparts use a number of scenarios as well. Expanding the Risks Captured in the Stress TestExploratory stress test scenarios could mitigate these and other risks. The goal of stress testing should be to provide sufficient coverage of the types of severe but plausible scenarios that could adversely impact a bank's operations, and the combination of scenarios and shocks should be curated to achieve this goal. This doesn't imply a large number of scenarios. Given the limited number of unique bank business models and variables that drive losses, a relatively small number of scenarios may be all that is required to capture a wide range of outcomes for the banking system.14 On the macroeconomic side, additional scenarios could be used to explore the effects of qualitatively different macroeconomic and financial environments. For example, instead of the usual demand-driven recession, a scenario could explore the impact of an inflationary shock to supply. Potentially, an exploratory scenario could probe the interplay between capital and liquidity, to help ensure firms understand their capital exposure to rapid changes in the composition or pricing of their liabilities.15 With respect to market risk, the current single market shock used in the test is a one-time shock to several thousand variables in bank trading books. This is just one realization of a large set of risk factors that determine changes in market values.16Using additional market shocks would help us understand how the trading books and counterparty concentrations of firms would change under a range of financial conditions. This could include testing the exposure of firms to different directional risks, such as a sudden rise or fall in certain asset values, or to an unexpected divergence in values of correlated assets.17It is particularly important for us to consider a range of market shocks because some concentrated counterparty exposures may be revealed only under certain scenarios. To advance the goal of improved testing of market risk, last year, for the first time, we introduced an additional, exploratory market shock component. As compared to the global market shock, the exploratory market shock was characterized by a less severe recession with greater inflationary pressures. As we explained in our results disclosure, banks generally looked better under the exploratory market shock, experiencing smaller trading and counterparty losses in the exploratory market shock than under the global market shock. This is valuable information to us and the public, since it suggests that these banks' trading and counterparty exposures may not be an unexpected source of vulnerability during a rising inflation scenario (although that test did not explore the effects of unrealized losses from interest rate risk). The exercise also provided important insight into banks' counterparty exposures in varying conditions, since banks' largest counterparties differed between the exploratory market shock and the global market shock. Building on these experiences, the Federal Reserve is developing both exploratory macroeconomic scenarios and exploratory market shocks for next year's stress test. As I noted above, an exploratory scenario would not be used to set a firm's stress capital buffer requirement. Instead, the exploratory scenarios will be used to inform the Board's supervisory assessments of firms' risk management and our understanding of different risks in the banking system. Using the Additional Stress Test ResultsLet me speak to how we currently use the stress test, and how we could use exploratory scenarios going forward. A current use of the stress test is to help set capital requirements for large banks to help prepare firms to withstand a severe economic recession and continue to lend and operate. The key features of the scenario used to calculate the capital requirements are generally similar from year to year. Since the stress test is used to set each firm's stress capital buffer requirement, there is a benefit to predictability so that firms are better able to conduct capital and business planning. To the extent we were to adjust key features of the scenario used to set the capital requirements, we would do so through a transparent, public process. However, a tradeoff with producing predictable scenarios is stifling creativity in scenario design and less bank resilience to a range of potential scenarios, and this is where exploratory scenarios can help. The use of stress scenarios and shocks that do not set a firm's stress capital buffer requirement can provide room to explore a wider range of vulnerabilities to inform risk-based supervision. For example, if the purpose of the exploratory scenario is to inform the Board or the public about new or underappreciated risks, the Board could explore the impact of a scenario using a different set of variables than the ones it has currently defined in its policy statement. Additional exploratory stress test scenarios could allow supervisors to better probe the internal risk management of firms and assess whether they are holding sufficient capital for their risks. For example, the 2018 stress test revealed that one firm had highly concentrated counterparty exposures that would materialize under the hypothetical stress scenario. This led to supervisory feedback to that firm and its prompt mitigation of the concern. We should continue to enhance the feedback loop between supervision and stress testing. We can also learn from our international counterparts, who have effectively employed exploratory stress tests. Since 2017, the Bank of England has run a biennial exploratory scenario designed to explore risks not covered by their annual capital stress test. The results of their exploratory tests are used to improve supervisory feedback related to the risk management of firms. While the results of our stress test are informative and provide a rigorous measure of resilience, the supervisory stress test is not a replacement for a firm's own risk management or its own stress testing processes. Large banking organizations should maintain a solid line of sight into their own risks and focus their efforts to capture those risks and determine capital needs. Our stress test is designed to provide a consistent measure of risk across firms, and is not a replacement for comprehensive modeling, risk management, and capital planning by the largest banks that enable them to measure and manage their own unique risks. The Future Evolution of Stress TestingExploratory scenarios would also allow the Board to have more flexibility in its modeling approaches. For example, the Board could explicitly model the behavioral response of depositors to losses, allowing for contagion of the type we saw earlier this year, the interaction of the broader economy and the banking system under stress, or the transmission of stress through nonbank parts of the financial system.18The Bank of England's recent stress tests included a set of models to better understand how feedback and amplification channels during a stress event could drive contagion losses and exacerbate the impact of an initial shock. These feedback loops included a contagion model testing how deteriorating capital positions might impact the market for interbank lending.19Expanding the use of exploratory scenarios in the stress test would allow for more experimentation in the modeling of risks by the Board's supervisory stress test program. ConclusionIn conclusion, forums such as this research conference are excellent sources of ideas and hypothesis testing. In thinking about the future evolution of stress tests, we would benefit from wide ranging input—from academics, other policymakers, public interest groups, bankers and other market participants. The stress test needs to continue to evolve. Introducing multiple exploratory scenarios—both for the broader macroeconomic scenario and the global market shock for trading banks—would be beneficial for supervising potential risks on bank balance sheets. These continued adjustments will help to ensure, consistent with the original intent of the Dodd-Frank Act, that the stress test remains a powerful and relevant tool for assessing whether large banks are resilient and our financial system is robust.20 Thank you. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Specifically, the Dodd-Frank Act directs the Board to conduct annual evaluations of firms to determine whether "such companies have the capital, on a total consolidated basis, necessary to absorb losses as a result of adverse economic conditions." 12 U.S.C. § 5365(i)(1)(A).Return to text 3. See D. P. Morgan, S. Peristiani, and V. Savino, "The Information Value of the Stress Test,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking46, no. 7, September 23, 2014: 1479–1500, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jmcb.12146.Return to text 4. See C. Sahin, J. de Hann, and E. Neretina, "Banking Stress Test Effects on Returns and Risks,"Journal of Banking and Finance117, August 2020, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378426620301096.Return to text 5. See R. Greenwood, J. Stein, S. Hanson, and A. Sunderam, "Strengthening and Streamlining Bank Capital Regulation (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution, Fall 2017).Return to text 6. See 12 C.F.R. § 252 appendix A.Return to text 7. See 12 C.F.R. § 252 appendixes A and B; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,2023 Stress Test Methodology(PDF)(Washington: Federal Reserve Board, June 2023).Return to text 8. See2023 Stress Test Methodology(PDF).Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Approves Rule to Simplify Its Capital Rules for Large Banks, Preserving the Strong Capital Requirements Already in Place," news release, March 4, 2020.Return to text 10. Banks with large trading operations are tested against a global market shock component that stresses their trading, private equity, and certain other fair-valued positions. Furthermore, banks with substantial trading or custodial operations are tested against the default of their largest counterparty.Return to text 11. Each year, the Federal Reserve refines the supervisory stress test, including its development and enhancement of independent supervisory models. The supervisory stress test models may be enhanced to reflect advances in modeling techniques; enhancements in response to model validation findings; incorporation of richer and more detailed data; and identification of more stable models or models with improved performance, particularly under stressful economic conditions.Return to text 12. See Richard J. Herring and Til Schuermann, "Objectives and Challenges for Stress Testing," (December 16, 2019), forthcoming in J. Doyne Farmer, Alissa Kleinnijenhuis, Til Schuermann, and Thom Wetzer (eds.),Handbook of Financial Stress Testing(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3504347 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3504347.Return to text 13. See Herring and Schuermann, 2019, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3504347.Return to text 14. See Bora Durdu, Rochelle Edge, and Daniel Schwindt, "Measuring the Severity of Stress-Test Scenarios," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 5, 2017), and R. Roengpitya, N. Tarasherv, K. Tsatsaronis, and A. Villegas, "Bank Business Models: Popularity and Performance (PDF)," Bank for International Settlements Working Paper no. 682 (Basel: BIS, December 2017).Return to text 15. See William F. Bassett and David E. Rappoport, "Enhancing Stress Tests by Adding Macroprudential Elements," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-022 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2022).Return to text 16. The global market shock is specified by a large set of risk factors that include, but are not limited to: equity prices, foreign exchange rates, selected-maturity government yields, selected maturities and expiries of implied volatilities that are key inputs to the pricing of interest rate derivatives, selected expiries of futures prices for energy products, selected expiries of futures prices for metals and agricultural commodities, and credit spreads or prices for selected credit-sensitive products.Return to text 17. As market makers, the banks subject to the stress test often take either long or short positions depending on the demands of their clients. As such, it is possible that at a given time, the firm is exposed to either rising or falling prices.Return to text 18. See e.g., D. Aikman, et. al,MacroprudentialStress Test Models: A Survey(PDF), Bank of England, Staff Working Paper No. 1,037 (London: Bank of England, August 2023).Return to text 19. See Bank of England, "Stress Testing the UK Banking System: 2017 Results (PDF)," (London: BOE, November 2017).Return to text 20. See 12 U.S.C. § 5365(i)(1)(A).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Economics of Payments XII Conference, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak with you today, at a time of great change, and great promise, for the payments system.1The Federal Reserve plays multiple roles in the payments system, including as a supervisor of banks and financial market utilities and as an operator of some key components of payments infrastructure. The research done by experts, including those in this room, is vital in helping us understand what works well in the payments system and what can be done to improve it. We introduced the FedNow Service® in July to facilitate secure and convenient instant payments. We developed FedNow in response to a growing demand for instant payments from both households and businesses. A hundred years ago, the Fed facilitated payments by moving checks across the country by train. FedNow represents new "rails" by which payments can keep pace with today's businesses and consumers. The Federal Reserve has now made these rails available; banks can build on this infrastructure to provide better service for households and businesses. It is hard to speak about payments innovation without mentioning the increased experimentation with new payments technologies, such as stablecoins and central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) happening in the private and public sectors, both in the United States and elsewhere. As this work proceeds, we must carefully weigh the benefits and risks of different uses of these new technologies. Stablecoins, as I have said in other remarks, need to be regulated. When an asset is pegged to a government-issued currency, it is a form of private money. When that asset is also used as a means of payment and a store of value, it borrows the trust of the central bank. So, the Federal Reserve has a strong interest in ensuring that any stablecoin offerings operate within an appropriate federal prudential oversight framework, so they do not threaten financial stability or payments system integrity. We also have provided guidance to the banks that we supervise on how they should engage with their supervisors when considering use of these products. In terms of CBDCs, we continue to speak to a broad range of stakeholders and conduct basic research in emerging technologies that might support a CBDC payments backbone, or for other purposes in the existing payments system. The research is currently focused on end-to-end system architecture, such as how ledgers that record ownership of and transactions in digital assets are maintained, secured, and verified, as well as tokenization and custody models. This work helps us consider how we could design a digital analog to the paper bank note that permits a transfer of value between two parties without direct facilitation by the issuing central bank. It is important to note, however, that while the Federal Reserve supports further research and continued engagement with a broad range of stakeholders, the Fed has made no decision on issuing a CBDC and, as Chair Powell has emphasized, would only proceed with clear support from the executive branch and authorizing legislation from Congress. With this in mind, learning from both domestic and international experimentation can aid decisionmakers in understanding how we can best support responsible innovation that safeguards the safety and efficiency of the U.S. payments system. We'll hear more about the results from some of these domestic and international initiatives on CBDCs later today. International collaboration and coordination are often essential in payments systems, as we heard in Jon Cunliffe's keynote yesterday. In 2020, the G20 governments endorsed a roadmap for enhancing cross-border payments, aimed at making them faster, cheaper, more transparent, and more accessible globally.2The Federal Reserve supports and continues to work with the international community on these issues, and I look forward to our ongoing engagement with stakeholders, both public and private, on the path forward. Closer to home, traditional payment methods are still the backbone of the U.S. payments system, despite the surge in interest in emerging payment technologies. It is important to advance research in both new and older payment methods. Questions on the use of cash and the dynamics among the players in the debit card industry remain worthy of investigation, as is evident in the conference agenda. Earlier this week the Board proposed revisions to the interchange fee cap for debit card issuers, as required by law. Public input is a key element of the rulemaking process for the Federal Reserve, and I look forward to reviewing the comments that we will receive on the proposed revisions. I also appreciate the opportunity for Federal Reserve staff to engage with the broader scholarly community on this and other topics, as research is an important component for our consideration of regulatory actions. Engagement with researchers, stakeholders, and the public will help the Federal Reserve continue to support a safe and efficient payments system, which has been part of our mission since the Fed's establishment in 1913. Finally, whether we talk about traditional or emerging payment technologies, in the public or private sector, innovation must proceed in a way that respects fundamental principles for serving the public good. Payments innovation should support and promote broad access and financial inclusion. Financial inclusion is affected by many factors, but too often the cost of a payment service is prohibitive and represents a barrier that limits access for low- and moderate-income households and small businesses. I am pleased to see that so many of the topics covered in this conference touch on factors that affect financial inclusion: issues of cost, trust, privacy, and security, among others. In conclusion, I want to thank the organizers for putting together this forum and I look forward to further engagement. Thank you all for being here and giving us the opportunity to learn more about your research. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2.https://www.fsb.org/2020/10/enhancing-cross-border-payments-stage-3-roadmap/Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, New York Before our discussion, I will take a few minutes to discuss recent economic data and the outlook for monetary policy. Recent Economic DataIncoming data over recent months show ongoing progress toward both of our dual mandate goals—maximum employment and stable prices. InflationBy the time the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised rates in March 2022, it was clear that restoring price stability would require both the unwinding of pandemic-related distortions to supply and demand, and also restrictive monetary policy to cool strong demand and give supply time to catch up. These forces are now working together to bring inflation down. After peaking at 7.1 percent in June 2022, 12-month headline PCE (personal consumption expenditure) inflation is estimated at 3.5 percent through September.1Core PCE inflation, which omits the volatile food and energy components, provides a better indicator of where inflation is heading. Twelve-month core PCE inflation peaked at 5.6 percent in February 2022 and is estimated at 3.7 percent through September. Inflation readings turned lower over the summer, a very favorable development. The September inflation data continued the downward trend but were somewhat less encouraging. Shorter-term measures of core inflation over the most recent three and six months are now running below 3 percent. But these shorter-term measures are often volatile. In any case, inflation is still too high, and a few months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. We cannot yet know how long these lower readings will persist, or where inflation will settle over coming quarters. While the path is likely to be bumpy and take some time, my colleagues and I are united in our commitment to bringing inflation down sustainably to 2 percent. The labor marketIn the labor market, strong job creation has met a welcome increase in the supply of workers, due to both higher participation and a rebound of immigration to pre-pandemic levels.2Many indicators suggest that, while conditions remain tight, the labor market is gradually cooling. Job openings have moved well down from their highs and are now only modestly above pre-pandemic levels. Quits are back to pre-pandemic levels, and the same is true of the wage premium earned by those who change jobs.3Surveys of workers and employers show a return to pre-pandemic levels of tightness.4And indicators of wage growth show a gradual decline toward levels that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time.5 GrowthTo date, declining inflation has not come at the cost of meaningfully higher unemployment—a highly welcome development, but a historically unusual one. Healing of supply chains in conjunction with the rebalancing of demand and supply in the labor market has allowed disinflation without substantially weaker economic activity. Indeed, economic growth has consistently surprised to the upside this year, as most recently seen in the strong retail sales data released earlier this week. Forecasters generally expect gross domestic product to come in very strong for the third quarter before cooling off in the fourth quarter and next year. Still, the record suggests that a sustainable return to our 2 percent inflation goal is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some further softening in labor market conditions.6 Geopolitical tensions are highly elevated and pose important risks to global economic activity. Our institutional role at the Federal Reserve is to monitor these developments for their economic implications, which remain highly uncertain. Speaking for myself, I found the attack on Israel horrifying, as is the prospect for more loss of innocent lives. Monetary PolicyTurning to monetary policy, the FOMC has tightened policy substantially over the past 18 months, increasing the federal funds rate by 525 basis points at a historically fast pace and decreasing our securities holdings by roughly $1 trillion. The stance of policy is restrictive, meaning that tight policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. Given the fast pace of the tightening, there may still be meaningful tightening in the pipeline. My colleagues and I are committed to achieving a stance of policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time, and to keeping policy restrictive until we are confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. We are attentive to recent data showing the resilience of economic growth and demand for labor. Additional evidence of persistently above-trend growth, or that tightness in the labor market is no longer easing, could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy. Along with many other factors, actual and expected changes in the stance of monetary policy affect broader financial conditions, which in turn affect economic activity, employment and inflation. Financial conditions have tightened significantly in recent months, and longer-term bond yields have been an important driving factor in this tightening. We remain attentive to these developments because persistent changes in financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy. ConclusionMy colleagues and I remain resolute in our commitment to returning inflation to 2 percent over time. A range of uncertainties, both old and new, complicate our task of balancing the risk of tightening monetary policy too much against the risk of tightening too little. Doing too little could allow above-target inflation to become entrenched and ultimately require monetary policy to wring more persistent inflation from the economy at a high cost to employment. Doing too much could also do unnecessary harm to the economy. Given the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the Committee is proceeding carefully. We will make decisions about the extent of additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Thank you. I look forward to our conversation. 1. Descriptions of PCE inflation include Board staff estimates of the September 2023 values based on available information, including the September 2023 consumer price index and producer price index data. The September 2023 PCE inflation data will be published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on October 27, 2023.Return to text 2. The labor force participation rate has increased by about one-half percentage point since the end of last year.Return to text 3. For example, according to the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker, the median wage growth for job switchers is now only slightly higher than that of job stayers. The size of this gap is now similar to what was normal pre-pandemic after being elevated in recent years.Return to text 4. A measure of job availability drawn from Conference Board data—showing the difference between the share of consumers saying that jobs are plentiful and the share saying that jobs are hard to get—was elevated in 2021–22 but is now below its 2019 average. In data from the National Federation of Independent Businesses, the share of small business owners reporting difficulty filling job openings has likewise declined considerably in the last two years and is now only slightly above its 2019 average.Return to text 5. One recent indicator, average hourly earnings, grew 0.2 percent in September, resulting in an annualized 3-month growth rate of 3.4 percent and a 12-month growth rate of 4.2 percent. By comparison, 12-month average hourly earnings growth peaked at 5.9 percent in early 2022.Return to text 6. For example, the October Blue Chip consensus estimate for annualized real gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the third quarter is 3.5 percent. Some projections anticipate even stronger growth, such as GDPNow, which currently anticipates 5.4 percent annualized growth in the third quarter, additional information is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's website athttps://www.atlantafed.org/cqer/research/gdpnow. The Bureau of Economic Analysis will release its advance estimate of third quarter real GDP on October 26.Return to text On-demand video
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At the 18th Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial Markets, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the 18th Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial Markets. This is the first time that this event has been held at the Federal Reserve Board, and we are very pleased to host the conference. Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. Our guests include academics from a number of institutions, both in the U.S. and abroad; fellow central bankers, including colleagues from the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank for International Settlements; and friends from across the Federal Reserve System and from several U.S. government agencies, such as the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the U.S. Treasury, including the Office of Financial Research (OFR). Now, since this is what you have gathered here to discuss, I do not have to convince this group of the critical importance of well-functioning financial markets for the economy. In my case, coming as a macroeconomist from the academic world to the Federal Reserve has only reinforced that conviction. Market Microstructure Is ImportantCentral bankers, regulators, and market participants ask a lot of financial markets. We want financial markets to be effective and efficient, and to aggregate and reflect all pertinent information. We rely on these markets to help us gauge how the economy is performing, to help us measure market expectations of monetary policy, and even to help us predict how the economy might evolve in the future. We want financial markets to be deep and liquid in good times, but also to remain deep and resilient when the economy is stressed. We want financial markets to be fair, so as not to favor certain participants. And central bankers, obviously, rely critically on financial markets for the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. As we have broadened our arsenal of policy tools over the past two decades and as markets have become larger, more complex, and more diverse, I would argue that it has become even more critical for us to understand in detail how financial markets operate. Effective and efficient financial markets do not happen automatically. The precise structure of each financial market, its trading rules, the mix of market participants and the constraints they face, how and how fast information is transmitted, all part of the microstructure of that market, do make an important difference. I think that fact has now become more widely recognized by economists. But it was not the case just a couple of decades ago, when most macroeconomists almost routinely assumed in their models that financial markets would function perfectly in the background. I believe that has changed—witness, for instance, the growth of macrofinance in recent years—and that change has certainly been an improvement. A Few Words about the Program and Interagency WorkNow, let me say a few words about the first financial market this conference will focus on, the market for U.S. Treasury securities. The U.S. Treasury market clearly remains the largest and deepest government securities market in the world. But it has changed a lot. To quote a recent speech by our former Fed colleague Nellie Liang, who is now the Under Secretary for Domestic Finance at the Treasury, "The market has changed significantly over time, with changes in technology, participants, and regulations, and Treasury debt outstanding has grown substantially."1 Some episodes of stress in the Treasury market, including a flash event in 2014 and, more recently, the Treasury repo market disruptions of September 2019 and the so-called dash-for-cash episode in 2020, have focused the attention of researchers and U.S. government agencies on the plumbing of the market and on the composition and behavior of its participants. For example, an interagency working group, composed of staff from the U.S Treasury, the SEC, the CFTC, the New York Fed, and the Board of Governors—several members of the group are here—has been studying a broad range of ideas to enhance the resilience of the market. The U.S. Treasury has also spearheaded initiatives to enhance data transparency. And the SEC has sought comments on several proposals that could materially alter the structure of the market. The Federal Reserve does not regulate markets, but we obviously have a special interest in the Treasury market, in part because some of our policy tools operate through that market and because of how important Treasury market functioning is to financial stability. And the recent discussions on the Treasury market have involved a lot on market microstructure and market design, including questions such as the following: As you can hear, this list of research questions contains a heavy dose of market microstructure content. Why am I sharing them with you? Just to make my final point: As economists focused on market microstructure, what you do is important, and what you do is immediately relevant. So, again, welcome to the Federal Reserve Board. I wish you an excellent conference. 1. See Nellie Liang (2022), "Remarks by Under Secretary for Domestic Finance Nellie Liang at the 2022 Treasury Market Conference," remarks, November 16.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Roundtable on Central Bank Digital Currency, Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Washington, D.C. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today on the important topic of innovations in money and payments. These issues continue to be of primary importance to the Federal Reserve.1As part of its key functions, the Federal Reserve carries out a number of different responsibilities that include As a policymaker, I view responsible innovation through the lens of accomplishing these policy goals. Innovation in money and payments can take many forms. We have continued to see interest in digital assets, such as crypto-assets, stablecoins, central bank digital currency (CBDC), and programmable payment platforms, including those built on distributed ledger technology (DLT). Alongside these innovations, we have embraced opportunities to improve the existing payment infrastructure by adopting and developing instant payments, planning for future technology upgrades and improvements, and considering other more straightforward changes like expanding operating hours for the wholesale payment infrastructure. Today I will share my views on several of these potential improvements, including CBDC, other digital assets, and wholesale payments innovations. I will also discuss the importance of determining whether the benefits of innovation flow from the new technology itself or, rather, result from policy choices that require new technology adoption. Throughout, I will lay out a vision for responsible innovation, which recognizes the important role of private-sector innovation and leverages the strengths of the U.S. banking system supported by clear prudential supervision and regulation, and I will discuss how policy can support the continued development of the payment system and broader financial system. Digital AssetsOften, discussions about the evolution of the payments landscape focus on novel forms of payment, including CBDC, stablecoins, and other forms of digital assets. Central Bank Digital CurrencyFirst, I will touch on CBDC. For the purposes of this discussion, I will define CBDC as a new, digital form of central bank money widely available to the general public. Some refer to this as a "general purpose" or "retail" CBDC. There are meaningful differences between this type of retail CBDC and what is commonly referred to as a wholesale CBDC, which is a term some use to refer to digital central bank money used to settle large-value transactions among banks. While I will return to the concept of a wholesale CBDC in a moment, I would like to share my thoughts on the debate about the introduction of a retail CBDC in the United States. As I have noted before in other venues, there are two threshold questions that a policymaker should ask when contemplating a CBDC. First: what problem is the policymaker trying to solve, and is there a more efficient way to solve it? Second: what features and considerations, including unintended consequences, should a policymaker think about before deciding to adopt a CBDC and in designing the operation of a CBDC?2 On the first question, we have seen a range of arguments in the public debate about issuing a CBDC, including addressing frictions within the payment system, promoting financial inclusion, and providing the public with access to safe central bank money. These are all important issues. I have yet to see a compelling argument that a U.S. CBDC could solve any of these problems more effectively or efficiently than alternatives, or with fewer downside risks for consumers and for the economy. Yet in the United States, we have a safe and efficient payment system that continues to evolve with responsible innovations, like the FedNow Service, which is the Federal Reserve's new interbank system for instant payments that launched in July of this year. Through FedNow, participating banks, businesses, and consumers can send and receive instant payments in real time, around the clock, every day of the year, with immediately available funds. FedNow, and a similar private sector service, is designed to help make everyday payments faster and more convenient, allowing consumers to instantly receive funds with same-day access, and enabling small businesses to more efficiently manage cash flows without processing delays. Future innovations may further build upon these services to more effectively address payment systems frictions and financial inclusion. It is quite possible that other proposed solutions may address many or all of the problems that a CBDC would address, but in a more effective and efficient way. Further, the potential benefits of a U.S. CBDC remain unclear, and the introduction of a U.S. CBDC could pose significant risks and tradeoffs for the financial system. These risks and tradeoffs include potential unintended consequences for the U.S. banking system and considerable consumer privacy concerns. The U.S. banking system is a mature, well-functioning, and effective system that delivers important benefits to our economy. Within this system, banks play a number of important roles, including providing consumers with access to credit and other banking and payments services, all within an established regulatory perimeter. In addition, bank compliance and reporting programs support important public policies, like deterring criminal activity and protecting consumer financial data. Banks also play an essential role in the transmission of monetary policy, and they provide the foundation for a well-functioning economy and financial system. The U.S. intermediated banking model helps to insulate consumer financial activities from unnecessary government overreach, and I believe this is an appropriate model for future financial innovation. If not properly designed, a CBDC could disrupt the banking system and lead to disintermediation, potentially harming consumers and businesses and presenting broader financial stability risks.3As policymakers, we would need to carefully consider how an intermediated CBDC, with private-sector service providers, could be designed in a way that maintains financial institution involvement and minimizes, or ideally, eliminates related disruptions to the broader U.S. financial system. I believe it is important to continue to research the possible benefits, risks, and tradeoffs of a potential U.S. CBDC, and to follow international CBDC developments that could have implications for the United States. However, given that we have a safe and efficient payment system and a well-functioning banking system, the potential uses of a U.S. CBDC remain unclear and, at the same time, could introduce significant risks and tradeoffs. That said, recognizing the interconnected and global nature of the financial system, I see value in continuing to research and understand the underlying technology and associated policy implications as other jurisdictions continue to actively pursue CBDCs. Doing so ensures we are aware of and can be responsive to any developments and can continue to support a safe and efficient financial system into the future. StablecoinsBut a CBDC is just one potential piece of the evolving payments landscape. Another alternative to traditional forms of money and payment, or to a CBDC, is stablecoins. This form of payment emerged primarily to support the trading of crypto-assets but increasingly has been proposed as an alternative to traditional payments and as a store of value. Stablecoins purport to have convertibility one-for-one with the dollar, but in practice have been less secure, less stable, and less regulated than traditional forms of money. Digital assets used as an alternative form of money and payment, including stablecoins, could pose risks to consumers and the U.S. banking system. Therefore, it is important to understand risks and tradeoffs associated with digital assets and new arrangements used for banking and payments. While I support responsible innovation that benefits consumers, I caution against solutions that could disrupt and disintermediate the banking system, potentially harming consumers and contributing to broader financial stability risks. And, where the activity happens outside the regulatory perimeter, consumers would be left without the adequate protections that our regulated and supervised banks provide today in the United States. A Comprehensive Regulatory FrameworkFor these reasons, my vision for responsible innovation includes a clear and sensible regulatory framework, where we incorporate what works well today in the U.S. banking system, allowing for private sector innovations within established guardrails. Within this framework, it is imperative that the same activities that present the same risks are subject to the same regulations—regardless of what a product is called and by whom it is offered. I think the desire for "new" often leads us to overlook existing success, both in terms of regulatory approach and financial services. Rather than speculate about the composition of alternative regimes, we should ask how these new products and providers can be held to the same standards as banks, especially with respect to consumer protection. As an example, stablecoin issuers today typically are licensed or chartered at the state level as money service businesses or trust companies, and, in some cases, offer bank-like services, including the ability to store funds. However, while many of these issuers are subject to state supervision, they are not subject to the full complement of prudential regulation applicable to banks like capital requirements and prudential supervision. They also do not benefit from the backstops and protections available to banks like deposit insurance coverage and access to central bank liquidity in times of stress. In order to protect consumers, it is imperative that activities that present the same risks are subject to the same regulations and offer the same protections. This approach would also allow banks to compete on a level playing field in introducing products and services to benefit consumers. This type of regulatory clarity can provide support for responsible innovation. Wholesale Payments InnovationNext, I will speak to potential improvements, including technological innovations, in wholesale payments. Wholesale payments generally refer to large-value, interbank transactions, and not consumers sending money to other consumers. This refers to the financial plumbing that banks use behind the scenes to settle payments. The Federal Reserve continues to speak to a broad range of stakeholders and conduct research regarding emerging technologies, including those that could enable or be supported by future Federal Reserve-operated payment infrastructures. The goal is to better understand potential opportunities and risks of new wholesale payment platforms, including those built on DLT, as well as the associated risks and benefits of depository institutions transacting on these platforms with "tokenized" forms of digital central bank money, sometimes called wholesale CBDC. In my view, the term "wholesale CBDC," despite its wide use, is generally a misnomer that leads to confusion since we already have central bank money in digital form that is available to banks for wholesale transactions.4Today, banks and other eligible entities hold central bank money as digital balances at the Federal Reserve—frequently referred to as reserves. These reserves are held for a number of purposes, including settling large-value interbank payments. Interbank payment services, like the Fedwire Funds Service and other private sector services, are critical to the functioning and stability of the financial system, and the economy more broadly, as they enable important financial market functions.5 Wholesale payment infrastructures operated by the central bank tend to underpin domestic and international financial activities by serving as a foundation for payments and the broader financial system. This infrastructure allows payments to flow safely between consumers and businesses within the United States and internationally. Since this infrastructure is so critical to the payments system, it is necessary that we investigate and understand the potential opportunities, risks, and tradeoffs for wholesale payments innovation to support a safe and efficient U.S. payment system. These wholesale systems function safely and efficiently today, but we have seen new payment platforms built on innovative technologies that have generated interest in new capabilities. This includes transacting "tokenized" forms of money and assets and enhancing the programmability of payments through the transfer of money using so-called smart contracts.These platforms are also being explored as a way to improve the efficiency of payment, clearing, and settlement of certain financial transactions, including for cross-border purposes. Policymakers should be mindful of the specific features innovative wholesale platforms could include, and the risks, tradeoffs, and other considerations they could entail. For example, one potential model under consideration is the concept of a common platform or shared ledger that could facilitate digital asset transactions, including commercial bank and central bank liabilities.6This type of ledger could be specific to one jurisdiction (such as U.S. dollar transactions only among regulated financial institutions) or across jurisdictions and containing multiple currencies. While there is interest in new capabilities and efficiencies that a shared ledger could offer, transacting central bank money on a shared ledger may introduce additional risks and operational complexities. This would depend on how a platform would be governed, and which entities would be allowed to participate. In the United States for example, this technology would introduce risks and complexities that do not exist today because a shared ledger might allow central bank money to circulate on a platform that is not owned and operated by the central bank. Important legal, policy, and operational questions would need to be thoroughly considered alongside an assessment of potential benefits. Another potential model is one where central banks maintain their own ledgers—just as they do today—and use DLT as a bridge between distinct ledgers to achieve interoperability and facilitate cross-border, cross-currency payments.7Still other models exist across both wholesale and retail payments that would leverage existing infrastructure. Examples include experiments that look at interlinking faster domestic payment systems to facilitate cross-border payments, or even exploring how existing domestic payment infrastructures could be incrementally improved.8Each model contains its own set of potential features and tradeoffs. While my vision for responsible innovation includes a broad understanding of different options, I continue to emphasize that to help focus efforts, we must begin by asking "What specific problem are we trying to solve?" The Importance of Policy ChoicesThis brings me to the question of whether the potential benefits from innovation come from new technology or from changes to existing policy. While conversations on payments innovation often focus on the technological capabilities, policymakers must apply a critical lens to understand whether changes to regulations or policies would be necessary to address specific concerns. Some potential technology solutions assume—or even require—policy change, such as issues related to operating hours and account access. In these cases, a new technology alone cannot solve the issue. Some point to a decentralized infrastructure to support digital assets as a solution to address current frictions in cross-border payments, like speed and cost of payments. However, these perceived payment limitations do not always stem from problems with existing technology, but rather from existing policies, laws, and even consumer and business preferences. And within the international context, some changes may require greater alignment across jurisdictions. Some purported payment limitations or frictions exist for specific reasons related to managing key risks that policymakers may not want to change, and it is important to understand the tradeoffs of these policy decisions. Let's use the example of compliance requirements that deter financial crimes and counter the financing of terrorism. These policies exist to accomplish specific policy goals and are implemented by banks that balance the need for transparency to deter crime and the protection of consumer financial information from government overreach. In these cases, the perceived barriers in existing payment systems are established for important public policy reasons and are not limitations resulting from the existing technology itself. It is important to not only thoroughly understand what technological innovationscando, but also what these innovationsshouldbe able to do within the broader context of a robust, well-functioning banking and payments system. My vision for responsible innovation requires that we continue to distinguish which specific payment frictions can benefit from technological innovation itself and which are questions of policy and exist for good reasons, as well as the recognition that we should not compromise vital public policies in the name of innovation. The Importance of Continued ResearchThe Federal Reserve remains open to multiple options to improve the payments landscape. We continue to conduct research to fully understand technological innovations and their associated benefits, risks, and tradeoffs. We must also fully understand any related implications for Federal Reserve payment infrastructure and policy outcomes. Researchers cover a wide range of policy areas, including payments policy, privacy considerations, financial inclusion, financial stability, and monetary policy implications. Because new digital assets are currently focused on tokenization of certain traditional or even new types of money, tokenization is a research theme for the Federal Reserve and for central banks globally. While this topic is relevant to CBDC research work, it will also inform other issue areas—including discussions about stablecoin regulation, novel banking activities supervision, and efforts to improve the current payment system. Technologists at the Board and the Reserve Banks have been conducting focused research and experimentation to provide insight into technical capabilities and risks associated with digital assets, including CBDC, and the programmable platforms that could support payment infrastructure improvements. These experiments give the researchers hands-on experience with new technologies and allow the Federal Reserve to examine the application of emerging technologies in retail, wholesale, and cross-border use cases. The Federal Reserve Board continues to collaborate closely with international counterparts on issues related to digital payments. This includes engagement with multilateral institutions, such as the Bank for International Settlements, G7, Financial Stability Board, and bilateral engagements with other central banks. This work reflects the interconnectedness of the global financial system and allows us to follow actions taken by other jurisdictions and understand any related implications for the United States. ConclusionAs the money and payments landscape evolves, I continue to stress the importance of looking ahead and analyzing potential changes that may emerge well into the future. This can be done most effectively by understanding the broad range of options that could be leveraged to improve payments, including technology, improvements to existing payment infrastructure, and policy options and their implications. Given the breadth of activity in this space, I believe that policymakers must specify the problems they are trying to solve, understand the range of alternatives that could address any problems, including policy and technology options, and thoroughly analyze the associated risks and tradeoffs. For all of the Federal Reserve's involvement in this work, I support a responsible approach to innovation that recognizes the role of private sector innovations, benefits from the strengths of the U.S. banking system, and focuses policymakers on thinking about payment and financial system infrastructure and effective policy. To achieve this, I support a clear regulatory framework that provides for responsible innovation while building upon what works well today and preventing disruption of the U.S. banking and payment system. Thank you for the opportunity to share my views on these important issues. 1. Thank you to Alex Sproveri and Priyanka Slattery of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. For additional discussion on CBDC, see Michelle Bowman, "Considerations for a Central Bank Digital Currency" (speech at Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., April 18, 2023).Return to text 3. The Federal Reserve's initial analysis suggests that a potential U.S. CBDC, if one were created, would best serve the needs of the United States by being privacy-protected, intermediated, widely transferable, and identity-verified. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,"Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation (PDF)"(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 2022).Return to text 4. Fabio Panetta, member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, has argued that wholesale CBDC has existed for decades. See Fabio Panetta, "Demystifying wholesale central bank digital currency" (speech at the Deutsche Bundesbank Symposium on Payments and Securities Settlement in Europe, Frankfurt, Germany, September 26, 2022).Return to text 5. For additional discussion on wholesale CBDC versus reserves on a wholesale payment platform, see Jon Durfee, Jesse Leigh Maniff, and Priyanka Slattery, "Examining CBDC and Wholesale Payments" (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 8, 2023).Return to text 6. Agustín Carstens, general manager of the Bank for International Settlements, has discussed the idea of a "unified ledger" run by the central bank to fully realize the potential of new technologies developed by the private sector. See Agustín Carstens, "Innovation and the Future of the Monetary System" (speech at the Monetary Authority of Singapore, February 22, 2023).Return to text 7. For example, see Project Cedar, a technical experiment by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Innovation Center, which examined whether distributed ledger technology could be used to improve the efficiency of cross-border payments and settlements involving multiple currencies, athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/nyic/project-cedar.Return to text 8. For example, see the Bank for International Settlements Innovation Hub Project Nexus proof-of-concept, which explores the interlinking of domestic faster payment systems, athttps://www.bis.org/about/bisih/ topics/fmis/nexus.htm.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Distinguished Speaker Seminar, European Economics and Financial Center, London, United Kingdom Thank you, Professor Scobie. Thank you to the European Economics and Financial Centre for inviting me to speak and for the honor of referring to me as a "distinguished speaker." I have noticed that people started calling me "distinguished" only after my hair turned white. I suspect that "distinguished" is a polite way of saying you are old. My subject today is one I trust is of interest in this center of global finance—namely, the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for monetary policy.1It has been one year and seven months since the Federal Reserve began raising interest rates to rein in inflation, and there has been considerable progress. But uncertainties remain, both about the forces that will shape the economic outlook in the coming months and about whether monetary policy has reached a level that is sufficiently restrictive to support continued progress toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) target of 2 percent inflation. Let me share my thinking about what recent economic data can, and in some cases, cannot tell us about the outlook and the appropriate setting for monetary policy. The data in the past few months has been overwhelmingly positive for both of the FOMC's goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Economic activity and the labor market have been strong, with what looks like growth well above trend and unemployment near a 50-year low. Meanwhile, there has been continued, gradual progress in lowering inflation, and moderation in wage growth. This is great news, and while I tend to be an optimist, things are looking a little too good to be true, so it makes me think that something's gotta give. Either growth moderates, fostering conditions that support continued progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective, or growth doesn't, possibly undermining that progress. But which is going to give—the real side of the economy or the nominal side? I find myself thinking about two possible scenarios for the economy in the coming months. In the first, the real side of the economy slows. This is the scenario broadly reflected in the September Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) by FOMC participants, where an easing in demand helps bring the economy into better balance with supply and allows inflation to move closer to our 2 percent objective. In this scenario, I believe we can hold the policy rate steady and let the economy evolve in the desired manner. But I also can't avoid thinking about the second scenario, where demand and economic activity continue at their recent pace, possibly putting persistent upward pressure on inflation and stalling or even reversing progress toward 2 percent. In such a scenario, failing to take action in a timely way carries the considerable risk of undermining what have been fairly stable inflation expectations and possibly unwinding the work that we have done to date. Thus, more action would be needed on the policy rate to ensure that inflation moves back to target and expectations remain anchored. Before getting into the economic data, let me address the increase in medium- and longer-term interest rates that has occurred since July. The 10-year Treasury yield is up about 90 basis points, while shorter-term maturities increased only a quarter of this amount and primarily early in the period. There are several factors that have been mentioned to explain this movement, including stronger-than-expected incoming data on third quarter economic activity, an increased focus on U.S. deficits and the associated increase in Treasury issuance, as well as geopolitical events and a flight to safety. Whatever the causes, I will be watching how these interest rates evolve in coming months to evaluate their impact on financial conditions and economic activity. Let's now dig into the recent economic data, starting with those on economic activity that help us get a handle on the strength of demand. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at about a 2 percent annual rate in the latter part of 2022 and the first half of 2023. Recent data suggest that this pace stepped up in the third quarter. The latest consensus estimate from the Blue Chip survey of business forecasters was that third-quarter real GDP grew 3.5 percent, and the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow model is coming in even higher. We'll get a first look at the third quarter GDP number next week, but it seems clear that economic activity was substantially higher for July through September than earlier in the year. The question is whether that acceleration of real activity will be sustained. Sometimes an uptick in activity is followed by some payback, or slowdown. For example, if firms pull construction forward because of good weather, then current structures investment will be high now but lower in the next period. Thus, we want to be careful and not pay too much attention to the specific month activity took place but instead average growth over a couple of quarters to get a clearer picture of the underlying strength of the economy. To see this point more clearly, recall that at the start of this year, personal consumption expenditures increased dramatically in the first quarter but subsequently grew less rapidly in Q2 of 2023. A similar dynamic may be playing out now. On the other hand, if the third quarter data represents the beginning of persistently stronger demand, then we can expect that strength to show up in the fourth-quarter data, including by putting upward pressure on prices, which could have ramifications for upcoming decisions on monetary policy. In thinking about these two possibilities, let me tell you how I view two key components of GDP growth this year. Consumer spending, which represents nearly 70 percent of GDP, has been quite strong thus far in 2023. While household spending has been volatile, smoothing it out over the past several quarters indicates underlying momentum. Yesterday's September retail sales data indicated continued strong spending. The solid spending in the face of tightened monetary policy suggests consumption is likely supported by households' strong balance sheets as well as confidence in future labor income. I will be watching the spending data carefully, including those that hint at a slowdown. Though hard to measure, it seems that households are drawing down their liquid assets. Some other data supporting a slowing include more use of credit cards this year and a return of delinquency rates for consumer loans, which plunged over the course of the pandemic, to essentially their pre-pandemic levels.2Also, as I mentioned earlier, financial conditions have tightened considerably since July. Of course, I have been waiting a while for tightening financial conditions to cause a significant slowing of spending, and I have been consistently surprised at the resilience of consumer spending. So I will be patient in waiting for the data to document how spending evolves. Another component of GDP that I'll be watching is investment in non-residential structures. Manufacturing investment boosted real GDP growth in the first half of the year, partly driven by a surge in the construction of semiconductor and electric battery factories that began before new government subsidies were enacted and driven higher by that legislation. Recent data suggests this spending is leveling off at a new, higher level: Construction spending growth has flattened out in recent months, and so have new project starts. In addition, the considerably higher interest rates over the past three months can dampen this growth. Only time will tell whether these factors slow investment activity or whether the subsidy programs and the enthusiasm for onshore chip and battery production continue to encourage higher investment spending. Let me turn now to the labor market. Since the FOMC's September meeting, the labor market data indicate continued tight conditions. The economy created 336,000 jobs in September, a robust figure that was much higher than forecasters expected. While the previous two job reports had signaled softer job growth, revisions to those reports added another 100,000 jobs. While down from the elevated levels seen in the first part of last year, the latest three-month average for new jobs of 266,000 is not that much different from the three-month average at the end of 2022 of 284,000. The inference is that job growth is still exceptionally strong and hasn't slowed much this year. Other data, however, are showing some continued loosening of conditions in the labor market. For example, looking through some monthly volatility, the number of job openings for every person counted as looking for a job was 1.2 in 2019 and shot up to a peak of 2 in March 2022. As we tightened policy and put downward pressure on labor demand, this ratio fell to 1.8 at this time last year and is currently 1.5. In addition, labor force participation has moved up notably this year, particularly among prime-age workers. Looking across various measures of labor compensation, the rate of wage growth has also moderated, despite an unemployment rate that is near a 50-year low. These metrics are not yet at their pre-pandemic levels but are moving closer to levels that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation. In sum, although the labor market is showing signs of loosening by various metrics, it is still unusually tight. While I anticipate that it will continue to loosen, I will be watching closely to see that this remains true. Now let's talk about inflation. As reported a week ago, headline inflation based on the consumer price index (CPI) was 3.7 percent in the 12 months through September, down significantly from 8.2 percent the year before. Core inflation, excluding energy and food prices, was 4.1 percent, down from 6.7 percent last September. We will get an update on personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation next week, but based on data we received through August, the 12-month percent change in PCE inflation was 3.5 percent and core PCE inflation was 3.9 percent. Focusing on the annualized three-month change in inflation gives a better, albeit noisy, indicator of inflation dynamics. With this measure, core CPI was 3.1 percent based on data from July through September. Core PCE, increased 2 percent based on June through August. Across the categories that make up these price indexes, one finds that more than half of them had annualized monthly price increases of less than 3 percent. Clearly, this is progress. And there are some factors that would be expected to put downward pressure on inflation in the coming months. Monetary policy is restrictive. Households are spending the excess saving accumulated during the pandemic and have growing levels of debt, which are likely to moderate spending growth. The increase in medium and longer-term interest rates over the past several months should weigh on both household and business spending. But, while core PCE inflation over the last three months has declined to our 2 percent target, there are a couple of reasons to be concerned that this progress might not continue. First, in the latest CPI report, despite expectations of continued deceleration, housing services prices jumped from a monthly change of 0.3 percent to 0.6 percent. I have been concerned since May about a resurgence of housing services inflation and this number heightens my concern that housing services inflation has not slowed, and may not slow, to the rate needed to sustain a return to our 2 percent target. Similarly, supercore inflation, which is core services excluding housing, has continued at a robust monthly rate of about 0.5 percent the past two months. Again, this reading is not at a level needed to make progress toward our goal and we need to watch and see if these numbers indicate that inflation is reaccelerating. The second reason to be concerned is that, while there is some basis for expecting that inflation will continue to fall, let me remind you, as I have done repeatedly, that we have seen a string of good inflation reports evaporate multiple times in the recent past. So I will be watching the next several reports for clearer indications that inflation is on a trajectory to 2 percent. What does that mean for monetary policy? I will be looking carefully at the data to see whether the real side of the economy begins to cool off or whether prices, the nominal side of the economy, heat up. As of today, it is too soon to tell. Consequently, I believe we can wait, watch and see how the economy evolves before making definitive moves on the path of the policy rate. Should the real side of the economy soften, we will have more room to wait on any further rate hikes and let the recent run-up on longer-term rates do some of our work. But if the real economy continues showing underlying strength and inflation appears to stabilize or reaccelerate, more policy tightening is likely needed despite the recent run up in longer term rates. So I will be watching to see if core inflation comes in higher than expected, perhaps sustained by continued strength in spending and investment or, if demand and the real economy slow, moderating core inflation. My views on the appropriate path for policy will be based on a careful assessment of incoming data and financial market developments and a judgement about whether we are continuing on a path of sustained progress toward 2 percent inflation. Thank you. I am happy to take some questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. This fact holds for both auto and credit card delinquencies across all levels of the income distribution.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Louis E. Martin Awards Ceremony at the 2023 Future of Black Communities Summit, Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C. Thank you. I am rarely at a loss for words, as my friends, family, and colleagues know all too well.1But I do find it a little hard to express everything I am feeling, to be given the Louis E. Martin Great American Award in honor of a truly great American who did so much to make ours a more perfect union. Tough to find the words, but I will try. Louis Martin did not lack for words. He was prolific, writing and publishing millions of words in newspapers as a key figure in the heyday of Black publishing in the 1950s and 1960s. There were also the words, and I would love to know what they were, that he spoke to the advisers of presidential candidate John F. Kennedy, who helped free the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King from a Georgia prison and arguably changed political history.2And there were those words he whispered, in the ears of presidents and politicos, that moved the nation forward on civil rights. When I think about everything Louis Martin accomplished, including the creation of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, and I consider the distinguished men and women who have earned this award before me, I am humbled and very grateful. One way I hope I can show my gratitude is by using this occasion to tell the wider world a story about the civil rights movement that should be better known and that is additionally meaningful to me for two reasons. The first reason is that this is a story about how the Federal Reserve, where I am a policymaker, came to be the first central bank in the world to make maximum employment a primary and explicit goal, coequal with its goal of price stability. And the second reason is that I had the memorable experience, as a Spelman College undergraduate, to hear some details about the lobbying for full employment and other economic policy objectives by one of the leaders of that movement. It is generally agreed that the legal roots of the Fed's employment mandate are in the Employment Act of 1946, itself inspired by a 1944 speech by President Franklin Roosevelt.3The law required all of the federal government to "promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power."4Alongside the preservation of "purchasing power," even then, the employment goal was linked to inflation. Federal Reserve Chairs cited the Employment Act as applying to monetary policy.5But it was rare for the Federal Reserve to refer to this statutory mandate when explaining monetary policy decisions. For example, the Federal Reserve Board's annual report for 1975 noted that in public statements on monetary policy given during the year by the Federal Reserve Chair, he had pointed to the "the very high rates of unemployment and of idle industrial capacity then prevailing" as a factor bearing on the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) decisions.6But the same annual report made no reference to the Employment Act. For some people, there wasn't any question of whether the Employment Act of 1946 should be a top priority. From its earliest days, the civil rights movement included full employment on a list of economic objectives deemed necessary to achieve the goals of freedom and political equality. Several leaders of that movement carried forward that goal into the 1960s, including the Rev. Martin Luther King and my cousin Floyd McKissick, Sr., but I would like to focus on an individual who probably did as much as anyone to establish maximum employment in 1977 as a goal assigned specifically to monetary policy. That person was Coretta Scott King. She had been a civil rights activist since attending the 1948 Progressive National Convention, where economic rights were discussed alongside other issues. After her husband's assassination, Mrs. King carried on his work for nonviolence, civil rights, and peace, but she was particularly focused on his economic justice agenda. Four days after MLK's death, in a speech at Memphis City Hall, she said that the right to employment had been on his mind: "Every man deserves a right to a job or an income," she said. "Our great nation … has the resources, but his question," (she means Dr. King's question) "was: Do we have the will?"7 A month later, she led a long-planned march in Washington known as the Poor People's Campaign, to push for bringing troops home and creating jobs and economic opportunity, with full employment prominent on the list of demands. That march was an extension of the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which was commemorated this year for its 60th anniversary. In the following years, Mrs. King used her considerable and growing stature to advocate for a broad agenda of economic empowerment, centered around the maximum-employment guarantee that had been law for decades. In 1973, the United States was hit with runaway inflation, this time accompanied by what became a deep recession—stagflation. In 1974, Mrs. King joined with elements of the labor movement to create the National Committee for Full Employment/Full Employment Action Council. She testified and walked the halls of Congress, doing just the kind of arm-twisting and coalition-building that Louis Martin was known for. That work culminated in 1975, with early versions of what would become the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978, also known as the Humphrey-Hawkins Act. In general terms, the law set economic priorities for the federal government centered on promoting good-paying jobs for all Americans. Humphrey-Hawkins established the objectives of maximum employment, stable prices, a balanced budget, and a balance of foreign trade, and it defined them by setting numerical goals. Coretta Scott King testified in favor of the legislation and its mandate of maximum employment. In practice, across the government, the numerical targets and goals in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act were not treated as legally binding. But one of Humphrey-Hawkins' undeniable legacies is how, as it headed toward likely passage, its employment and inflation objectives were enshrined in the 1977 amendments to the Federal Reserve Act, establishing the dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. This began a process in which the Federal Reserve increasingly tied its policy decisions to statutory goals. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve Board published theMonetary Policy Report, as required by Humphrey-Hawkins, and, along with the report's release, the Chair regularly gave testimony on the Committee's plans. In 1979, inflation remained a big challenge, and a lasting period of price stability did not return until the 1990s. In 2007, the FOMC began publishing a summary of the economic projections of its participants, including the range of estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate, an indication of their views of maximum employment. Subsequently, the FOMC responded forcefully to the deep recession caused by the 2008 financial crisis to support employment, helping usher in an expansion that eventually brought the unemployment rate to its lowest level in 50 years. It also reacted vigorously to the economic weakness associated with the pandemic, and unemployment has now returned to its pre-pandemic lows, even as we have worked to return inflation to our 2 percent objective. Central banks around the world generally treat the stabilization of employment as an important policy objective. Yet most have employment mandates only informally or secondarily in their statutory assignments. In contrast, the Federal Reserve's mandate is clear that maximum employment is on an equal footing with price stability. But Fed policymakers recognize that the maximum level of employment is not directly measurable and that it changes over time as the structure of our economy evolves. For that reason, we do not set a fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. This is wise considering that the past three decades have shown that unemployment can fall well below the levels that economists once predicted would overheat the economy. In a development that I suspect would please Augustus Hawkins and Coretta Scott King, in 2020, the FOMC declared that "maximum employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal."8It is now common for Fed policymakers to note with enthusiasm when long-term disparities in employment and wages between minorities and other groups narrow. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act expired in the year 2000, but the spirit of Mrs. King's quest for full employment is alive and well. I dare to wonder what Coretta Scott King would think about these developments, because of the experience I had as an undergraduate, meeting her and hearing her talk about her lobbying for policies to promote employment and economic opportunity. At the time, I had not yet decided to devote my career to the study of economics, but when I did, it was in part because of the belief that wise economic policy could accomplish some of the goals that Coretta Scott King devoted herself to. Mrs. King pushed the maximum-employment mandate as hard and consistently as she did because she believed, in her words, that "unemployment lies at the root of all our major social problems."9Economists also understand that employment is the key to a healthy economy. Maximum employment boosts long-run (noninflationary) economic potential. It means that a vital resource is being used productively. A strong labor market increases labor force participation and the willingness of firms to recruit and upgrade the skills of workers. Maximum employment also promotes business investment that boosts productivity and long-run economic potential. And the full participation of all segments of society should be expected to result in more ideas, including more diverse ideas, more invention, and more innovation. These are the benefits of the Fed's maximum-employment goal and part of the legacy of Coretta Scott King. In closing, I want to thank Interim President Fulton and the board of the Joint Center for the great honor of this award, as well as the opportunity to review some important history that shaped the Federal Reserve's efforts to promote a healthy economy. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Louis Martin was among the civil rights leaders who sought help from the Republican and Democratic presidential campaigns in 1960 when King was sentenced in DeKalb County to 30 days of hard labor on trumped-up charges.Return to text 3. The act, which Congress passed in 1945, was inspired by Franklin Roosevelt's 1944 State of the Union message, which proposed a "Second Bill of Rights" or "Economic Bill of Rights." FDR said, "We have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence." His list of rights included "the right to a useful and remunerative job," echoed by the Employment Act's recognition of "the right to a useful and remunerative job in the industries or shops or farms or mines of the nation." The full 1944 State of the Union message is available on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum's website athttps://www.fdrlibrary.org/address-text.Return to text 4. See the Declaration of Policy on page 1 of the Employment Act of 1946, available athttps://fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/docs/historical/congressional/employment-act-1946.pdf.Return to text 5. See, for example, William McChesney Martin's August 13, 1957, statement before the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, which is available athttps://fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/docs/historical/martin/martin57_0813.pdf?utm_source=direct_download.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976)62nd Annual Report 1975(PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, June, p. 51.Return to text 7. See David P. Stein (2016), " 'This Nation Has Never Honestly Dealt with the Question of a Peacetime Economy': Coretta Scott King and the Struggle for a Nonviolent Economy in the 1970s," Souls, vol. 18(1), p. 85.Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Open Market Committee Announces Approval of Updates to Its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," press release, August 27.Return to text 9. Video provided by the King Center of Coretta Scott King speaking at "Overcoming the Barriers to Full Employment" at Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, January 13, 1978.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2023 Community Banking Research Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri It's a pleasure to be back in St. Louis for the annual Community Banking Research Conference. I am grateful for the continued partnership between the Federal Reserve, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and I would like to thank the conference organizing committee for putting together this important forum, now in its 11th year. This conference provides an excellent opportunity for policymakers to pause and reflect on the impact of current U.S. bank regulatory policies on the financial system. At the same time, we should also consider how alterations to these policies will influence the future of the broader banking system. We get a view into these questions—the effectiveness of past policy choices and insights that can help shape future policy reforms—from several aspects of this conference, including, of course, the research that will be presented and from the results of the CSBS Annual Community Bank Survey. We also gain insight from the experience and perspectives of our participants: your questions and commentary throughout the next few days can provide important context about the intended and unintended consequences of past policy decisions. And the combined perspectives from the wide range of experts gathered here—the researchers, regulators, policymakers, and bankers—will provide us with valuable insights into how to better establish and calibrate bank regulatory and supervisory policy in the future. Research, data, and analysis are essential to thoughtful bank regulatory reform. These tools can be used to identify issues that must be addressed or remediated; they can help us evaluate which elements of the current bank regulatory framework may be effective or ineffective, and they can help us craft reforms with a clearer understanding of the intended and unintended consequences. Together, these tools can help us develop and implement appropriate regulatory reforms that do not impair the long-term health or impede the future growth of our diverse U.S. banking system, enabling us to avoid the pitfalls of reforms that fail to accomplish these important goals. Today I will begin by discussing some of the research around community banks and the role they play in the U.S. banking system. I will then discuss how this research can inform policy, including by helping us be more sensitive to the unintended consequences of reform, and discuss how this perspective can be applied to the evaluation of bank mergers and acquisitions. Finally, I will mention a few additional areas where I think research could be valuable as an input to the rulemaking process. The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in RulemakingGood research leads to good policy. This statement will likely sound familiar to many of you, as it was how Jim Bullard, the former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, would describe one of the key purposes of this conference in past years. Over the years, many of the conference speakers and presenters have echoed that same sentiment since this conference first launched in 2013. In my remarks today, I will discuss the importance of using an evidence-based approach to bank regulatory policy, which has been a long-standing theme and goal of this conference. While research can provide valuable insights to inform revisions to bank regulatory policy, research is particularly important when it comes to regulatory efforts that directly affect community banks, including changes to modernize the Community Reinvestment Act regulations, or reforms to the supervisory standards and expectations for community banks. Research also plays an important role in helping us understand policy reforms that affect community banks indirectly, such as the potential that regulatory requirements designed to apply only to larger banks could eventually be pushed down to smaller and community banks. Research and evidence-based rulemaking can insulate the banking system from wide swings in policy over time. The banking system faced significant challenges this year, triggered by the failures of three large banks in the early spring. As I noted at the time, the policy choices made in responding to these failures will have important, long-term consequences for the U.S. banking system.1The potentially far-reaching consequences of policy choices we make during this time highlight the importance of clearly identifying the problems we are attempting to address using data to craft solutions that are effective, targeted, and efficient. Bank failures demand scrutiny, but bank failures alone do not justify wholesale revisions to the bank regulatory framework. Before we undertake reforms intended to address issues that led to bank failures, we need to develop a comprehensive understanding not only of those root causes, but also of the costs and unintended consequences of potential reforms. Research can protect against over-reactive regulation, especially that which is not efficient, calibrated and tailored to address the actual risks and challenges facing the banking system. My insistence upon being guided by evidence does not imply that I am opposed to regulatory reforms, but rather that policymakers should be expected to show their work. The banking system is not perfect, and policymakers should continually ask themselves if there are ways to improve regulation and supervision. I am always open to considering evidence-based proposals that address known deficiencies and shortcomings in our regulatory and supervisory framework, but any such proposals must stop short of interfering with or stepping into the role of managing the financial institution. I am very pleased that this research and policy conference has continued to thrive and grow over the 11 years since its inception. The research work you all do, especially your efforts to develop data and analysis to inform policy, is a critical input to the rulemaking process. While research is a foundation of prudent regulatory policy, the community banks that operate under this framework are the reason we are gathered together at the Saint Louis Federal Reserve Bank. So, let's build upon that foundation to highlight the role of community banks in the U.S. banking system. The role of community banks in the U.S. banking systemAs is necessary and appropriate when speaking at a research conference, let's start with the research. Research can help reinforce a statement that policymakers often make, which is that banks of all sizes—including community banks—are a critical part of a healthy and vibrant banking system. Today, there are around 4,200 community banks in the United States.2What role do these community banks play in the current U.S. banking system and in the communities they serve? While my discussion could not possibly do justice to the vast body of research addressing the important role of community banks in providing credit and supporting their communities, I would like to highlight a few research findings that will likely resonate with community bankers and researchers. A classic 2002 paper from economist Allen Berger and his co-authors looked at how banks process information to make credit allocation decisions, with the goal of evaluating the differences between small and large banks.3The paper provided empirical evidence that small banks have a comparative advantage over large banks in making small business loans due to their specialized ability to effectively produce "soft information" on smaller firms and make effective credit decisions based on this information. In contrast, the paper finds that larger banks are at a comparative advantage when lending to larger firms that can produce more "hard information" that can be easily verified and documented. This research validates and confirms that community banks leverage the power of "relationship banking," and in doing so, are an important source of credit to a critical segment of the economy. This finding also helps explain why community banks were able to more effectively and on a large scale implement the Paycheck Protection Program during the pandemic in comparison with large banks. As another, more recent example, a paper published last year by economist Elizabeth Berger provides additional context to the role of community banks and the policy issues currently being debated. This paper focuses on the role community banks play in the creation of service sector jobs. We've seen the important role of service-oriented jobs for job growth the U.S., as our economy has moved away from manufacturing- and production-based employment over the course of many decades. The paper looks at both the extent to which small businesses' physical access to a local, relationship lender supports growth in service sector jobs and explores whether this growth is the result of access to local banking institutions. She found that service sector job creation is not only supported by relationship lending from local community banks but also depends on smaller, relationship lenders for growth. Her key finding is unambiguous: "finance [providers] must be local to facilitate service job creation."4 These research findings will certainly not surprise community bankers, state bank regulators, or those who directly see the positive impact of community banks on their local communities. But equally important from a policymaker's perspective is what these papers tell us about the impact of a community bank exiting its local community and the surrounding market. What happens when a small business has no local, community banker that takes the time to understand its business, whose business model is based on developing long-term banking relationships? Would small businesses be better served if their banking relationships are with large, non-relationship-based banking institutions? Or if the only alternative source of credit for small businesses were from nonbank lenders that are not subject to the same regulatory oversight as banks? Understanding these issues can provide important context, not only to understand the current banking landscape, but also to evaluate the merit of reform proposals. Reforms that result in impairing the future of the community banking industry or the elimination of community bank charters to mergers or acquisition because of over-regulation or excessive compliance burden can have a significant, adverse impact on small business formation in local communities given the hurdles new small businesses face when seeking credit. And, while it might be tempting to assume that alternative sources of credit would arise to fill a gap left by community banks, this is not a given. For example, while credit unions compete with banks in many banking markets, credit unions are not, by design, by structure, and by regulation, small business lenders. Some of the research that will be presented later today and tomorrow explores different aspects of community banking and the role community banks play in the current banking market. I look forward to learning more about this research and how it can serve to inform current and future bank regulatory reform efforts. Implications of the evidence for regulatory policyThe research I mentioned earlier has important implications for policymakers, as it suggests that factors that contribute to a reduction in the number and lending footprint of community banks could lead to a number of negative impacts, including credit constraints for small businesses and small business start-ups. This issue could be especially acute when a market—an underserved market—is left without a community bank as a source of credit. The research highlights that a banking desert does not only affect individuals, but also can have a devastating impact on small businesses, local job formation, and local economies. One important influence on banking market competition is bank mergers and acquisitions (M&A), including the important role of regulators in reviewing and approving these transactions. While one might naturally assume that approving mergers would always lead to a reduction of community bank lending, this result may not always be the case, as in markets viewed as less attractive or undesirable to large or regional banks, where the only option for community banks to survive may be to consolidate with other community banks in the same geographic area. Surely, some level of consolidation is preferable to the closure of community banks and the perpetuation of banking deserts or zombie banks. At this conference last year, I described what I called the "New Landscape for Banking Competition" and stressed the urgency of updating and modernizing the framework the federal banking regulators and the Department of Justice use to evaluate the competitive effects of proposed bank mergers.5I offered several commonsense proposals that should guide our thinking about how we evaluate bank mergers in the future and underscored how calibrating our guidelines correctly is critically important for community banks, given the evidence we have on their role and impact in providing credit in local communities. Among those ideas was a more systematic inclusion of nonbank competitors and credit unions in our competitive landscape. I also proposed factoring in digital banks, and those more traditional banks who have established a strong national digital presence, in our competition analysis. These institutions have proven to be very effective at attracting deposits from anywhere in the country and therefore clearly compete with banks in urban and rural markets across the U.S. Why is this important? In our current system, many of the competitors and new entrants that we do have (nonbanks, fintech firms, credit unions), are systematically ignored. The baseline assumption in our current framework is that credit unions do not compete with banks, and yet, just last month we saw five announced acquisitions of community banks by credit unions.7Despite this trend, after a community bank has been acquired by a credit union, the resulting credit union is no longer viewed as a baseline competitor with other community banks in the market. I think it is fair to question whether this view is consistent with reality. We have also seen significant changes in how consumers access banking products and services and observed the migration of many types of loans from the banking sector to nonbanks, including 1–4 family residential mortgage loans. In fact, the top three mortgage lenders in the country are nonbanks. Even the largest U.S. banks are behind these nonbanks when it comes to mortgage originations.8But we do not consider these entities as competitors when evaluating a merger involving a community bank.9 Under our current framework, it appears as if regulators have closed the door to a broad range of potential mergers that are perceived to raise competitive concerns in rural markets, by using an artificially narrow lens to evaluate competition concerns. Many merger proposals are regularly forced to go through an extensive, lengthy, and ultimately costly review process. As we've seen in recent months, this can result in extending the processing of the underlying merger, sometimes by as much as a year. While there is a lag in the reporting of applications data, data from 2022 show that the average processing time for applications has increased significantly from 2019 through 2022 for banks of all sizes.10Information published by the Federal Reserve suggests that this increase was primarily the result of the Board's concurrent consideration of several relatively large and complex M&A proposals requiring Board action. Data through the first half of 2023 showed some improvement in average processing times, but the volume of approved M&A applications were down substantially from a year ago, while the number of M&A applications withdrawn in the first half of 2023 has already exceeded the total number withdrawn in all of calendar year 2022.11 Reported information highlights that community banking organizations also experienced increased processing time for M&A proposals from 2021 to 2022, with the average time increasing from 63 days to 72 days for banks under $1 billion in assets, and from 51 days to 96 days for banks from $1 billion to $10 billion in assets.12While this average processing timeline improved slightly for community bank M&A applications in the first half of 2023, the most recent semiannual report on banking applications acknowledges that there were fewer M&A applications by community banks in the first half of 2023 as compared with the first half of 2022.13Applications of any size can raise novel issues or concerns, but this should raise concerns with policymakers. While the cause of such delays may vary—for example, receiving an adverse comment on a proposal can also result in a longer application processing period—lengthy review periods can have significant adverse consequences to firms and the banking system. Long delays can lead to a number of negative outcomes, including loss of key staff, pauses on new investment and development of new consumer and business products, expensive delays in systems integration, reputational risk, and shareholder losses. We've also seen that when a merger is either approved or denied after a lengthy process, the institutions involved are generally weaker than they would have been had a determination been made in a more reasonable time frame. This is not the recipe for a responsible regulatory system or a healthy banking system. Of course, there are alternatives to this view of competition in rural markets. As noted in the research I cited earlier, when looking at the competitive effects of a potential bank merger, it might be more appropriate to look at the extent to which small businesses in a market would have choices that include a community bank when seeking credit, rather than looking only at the overall share of deposits an institution would have in a given banking market. The research sends a strong signal that preserving local relationship-based community banks is vital to local economies. This suggests that a regulatory review framework should not be designed to obstruct mergers that result in stronger, more diversified community banks, with relationship business models. Clearly, these policies need to change, unless the goal is to facilitate further consolidation of banking products and services into the hands of a few national players. This research has implications beyond just bank merger policy. For example, while bank regulatory reform proposals may consider the incremental additional burden on regulated institutions, this approach may be too narrow a lens, particularly for community banks. The cumulative burden of regulations coupled with extensive supervisory guidance can be a significant headwind for community banks, and local communities and customers served by community banks often bear the consequences. Future Areas of ResearchAfter nearly five years serving on the Board of Governors in the seat designated for someone with community banking or state bank supervisory experience, I am inspired by the potential of research to shape policy to reflect the practical reality. Many of you in this room have contributed important research that has energized policy discussions and debates. I am confident that this year's lineup of research papers will spark similar conversations. Year after year, researchers have presented evidence that a banking system with diverse business models and sizes is better for business formation and leads to better penetration of financial services products across all industry sectors. You've demonstrated direct benefits to small businesses (including agriculture-based businesses) and to nontraditional mortgage borrowers when smaller, local lenders operate in a market.14You've shown how community banks provide a window into local economies and local industries and provide an overall view of the health of the U.S. economy. As we look past this conference, I'd like to suggest a few areas that warrant further research and debate. Reconsideration of the community bank asset thresholdFirst, our regulatory system is very complex, and one thing that adds to this complexity is the often-inconsistent definitions we use, including the definition of a "community bank." These definitions are important—they are used to clarify which requirements and rules apply to a certain type of institution. Policymakers should strive to avoid unnecessary complexity or confusion around these thresholds. Most commonly, when we refer to a community bank, we are referring to an institution with less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets. This threshold was referenced in several sections of the Dodd-Frank Act as a way to differentiate requirements among banks and was explicitly referred to in the subsequent Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act.15Of course, the reality is that our regulatory system applies different rules to different institutions across a wide range of asset sizes. For example, the Community Reinvestment Act regulation includes asset thresholds well below any common understanding of what a community bank is. It simply makes sense that the definition would be rationalized across the bank regulatory framework. Are these asset size thresholds properly calibrated, and are the impacts, costs, and benefits to institutions and to customers when banks cross these different thresholds rational? Are these thresholds creating the right incentives to promote prudent lending while appropriately balancing risk? We also need a better framework to understand whether we should move beyond simple asset size thresholds when tailoring our regulatory rules to the risks that different banks pose based, perhaps not on size, but on business model. Further, is it possible to move beyond asset size thresholds and still apply our dual banking system's tailored supervisory and regulatory approach in a way that is clear and transparent to all stakeholders? Again, research continues to show the benefits that relationship-based commercial lenders provide to communities. I believe it is of paramount importance to develop a clear and transparent framework for defining who these lenders are so we can tailor our regulations appropriately. Insured and uninsured deposits in bank funding modelsA second area that deserves additional research is how banks fund themselves, and whether the deposit infrastructure—including deposit insurance—could be improved, including to make the banking system more resilient during times of financial stress. As we saw earlier this year, the speed at which customers can move money using modern technology is unprecedented. Much like our competition framework, we need to ensure that the framework that we put in place today supports the banking system of tomorrow and not the banking system of yesterday. With respect to deposit insurance reform, the FDIC laid an important foundation when it released its report on the Options for Deposit Insurance Reform in May 2023.16The framework shared the FDIC's views of the pros and cons of either providing unlimited deposit insurance coverage or targeted coverage based on different account types. The report suggested that targeted coverage might be the best option for maintaining financial stability and protecting depositors. We need to ensure that our deposit insurance infrastructure can support banking sector stability in the face of the challenges posed by today's technology. This report, however, should not just serve as a call for policymakers to react to a narrow scope of options developed in reaction to a bank run crisis but should be seen as a call to the research community to provide evidenced research and analysis on these and other options. I see an opportunity for extensive stakeholder engagement and public dialogue on the topic of deposit insurance and the evolution of deposit practices. In my conversations with community bankers this spring, I learned that a large number of concerned customers called their local community banker with questions about deposit insurance. Community bankers have direct experience and insights into the benefits and challenges of our current deposit insurance infrastructure. Their insights can complement research on this topic and can bring a valuable and realistic practitioner's perspective to this significant matter of public policy. ConclusionAs I reflect on the past seven years of my participation in this conference, first as a state bank commissioner, and now as a member of the Board of Governors, I am struck by how the approach taken by this conference is, in some ways, a smaller scale model of what I see as an effective approach to policymaking: I'd like to commend all who have gathered today for participating in person to discuss the research and to learn from the work and experiences of one another. This conference contributes a wealth of insights and evidence that lead to better policy choices and can help us understand where future challenges to the banking industry might emerge. Our call to action coming from this conference, in my view, is to resist the urge to act in a reactionary way when addressing policy matters. Instead, policymakers should choose to exercise restraint and patience, consider the evidence, and strive for well-calibrated policies that fully incorporate the costs, benefits, and impacts of reform and complement, rather than complicate or contradict, the existing regulatory framework. 1. Michelle W. Bowman,The Evolving Nature of Banking, Bank Culture, and Bank Runs, speech at the 21st Annual Symposium of Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States, European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany, May 12, 2023.Return to text 2. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,Quarterly Banking Profile, Second Quarter 2023 (PDF), at 14.Return to text 3. Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein,Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks (PDF), National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 8752 (Cambridge, MA: NBER, February 2002).Return to text 4. E. A. Berger, "Finance in the New U.S. Economy: Local Finance and Service Job Growth in the Post-Industrial Economy,"Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, September 9, 2020, 57(5), 1987–2021, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3718458.Return to text 5. Michelle W. Bowman,The New Landscape for Banking Competition, speech at the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri, September 28, 2022.Return to text 6. Reports of Condition and Income (Call Reports) and the Competitive Analysis and Structure Source Instrument for Depository Institutions (CASSIDI). CASSIDI combines data from the FDIC's Summary of Deposits and banking market definition information into a comprehensive analysis tool for use by regulatory agencies and banking organizations for performing pro-forma competitive factors analyses on potential bank mergers.Return to text 7. Jim Dobbs and Ken McCarthy, "Two Credit Unions Are on a Bank Shopping Spree,"American Banker,September 1, 2023, https://www.americanbanker.com/creditunions/news/two-credit-unions-are-on-a-bank-shopping-spree.Return to text 8. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,Home Mortgage Disclosure Actdata, 2022.Return to text 9. Greg Buchak and Adam Jorring,Do Mortgage Lenders Compete Locally? Implications for Credit Access (PDF), working paper, July 2021.Return to text 10. SeeBanking Applications Activity Semiannual Report, July 1–December 31, 2022 (PDF), (10, 1), table 2 (May 2023), (showing that for mergers and acquisitions proposals considered by the Board, the average processing time for applications increased from 60 days in 2019 to 87 days in 2022).Return to text 11. Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report, January 1–June 30, 2023, (10, 2), table 2 (September 2023) (showing 46 M&A applications approved and 12 applications withdrawn in the first half of 2023, compared to 87 M&A applications approved and 4 applications withdrawn in the first half of 2022, with 11 withdrawn M&A applications for the entire calendar year of 2022).Return to text 12.Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report, July 1–December 31, 2022 (PDF), (10, 1), table 4.Return to text 13.Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report, January 1–June 30, 2023 (PDF), (10, 2), table 4.Return to text 14. Daniel Rabetti,Non-Information Asymmetry Benefits of Relationship Lending (PDF), working paper, Coller School of Management (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University, August 2022), Claire Brennecke, Stefan Jacewitz, and Jonathan Pogach,Shared Destinies? Small Banks and Small Business Consolidation (PDF), working paper, July 2020.Return to text 15. Dodd-Frank Act, P.L. 111-203, §§ 165(h)(2)(A), (i)(2)(A), 723(a)(3), 763, 1025(a), 1026(a); Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, P. L. 115-174, §§ 201 (defining a qualifying community bank as one with total consolidated assets of less than $10 billion), 203 (giving relief to community banks from the Volcker rule).Return to text 16. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,Options for Deposit Insurance Reform, (Washington: FDIC, May 1, 2023).Return to text
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At "Beyond the Business Cycle: Adapting to a New Global Paradigm" 65th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Dallas, Texas IntroductionThank you for inviting me to join this conference and for the kind introduction.It is a pleasure to be here. Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I will take this opportunity to share with you my outlook on the U.S. economy. I will also discuss risks facing the economy. Then, I will turn to the transmission of monetary policy, including some recent evidence on a source of lagged effects of policy. Finally, I will discuss considerations for monetary policy that follow from efforts to manage risks given the lagged effects of monetary policy. These considerations include the need to proceed carefully as the risks of tightening monetary policy too much relative to those of not tightening enough move closer into balance. With that, let me turn to my outlook for the U.S. economy. The Inflation OutlookEven though recent inflation data have been encouraging, inflation remains too high. Over the 12 months ending in August, total Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) prices rose 3.5 percent, the black line infigure 1. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 3.9 percent, the red line. To better understand core inflation trends, I find it useful to look at three large categories that together make up the core PCE price index, because what has been causing inflation in each of these sectors is somewhat different. The first category, core goods inflation, the red line infigure 2, has slowed strikingly, as supply chain–related price pressures continue to ease. The second category, housing services price inflation, the black line, has clearly stepped down, as was anticipated given the previous slowing of increases in rents for new tenants. In contrast, price increases for the third category, core nonhousing services, the blue line, have yet to show a significant slowdown. Since this segment accounts for more than 50 percent of the overall core PCE index, we will need to see further slowing in this area to meet our inflation objective. Nevertheless, I believe that core PCE prices will moderate further as the labor market comes into better balance. The Labor MarketDespite the strong September labor market data we received last week, there is evidence that the imbalance between labor demand and labor supply continues to narrow, as labor demand cools while labor supply improves. Even so, the labor market remains tight. Consistent with cooling labor demand, job openings declined by nearly 1 million from the end of January to the end of August. Nevertheless, as shown infigure 3, job openings remain about 30 percent above their pre-pandemic level. At the same time, layoffs have remained very low, and the pace of payroll employment gains remains strong, with September nonfarm payroll job gains coming in higher than expected. In addition, the unemployment rate is 3.8 percent, a level that is still near historical lows. The fact that the unemployment rate and layoffs have remained low over the past year amid disinflation suggests that there is a path to restoring price stability without the kind of substantial increase in unemployment that has often accompanied significant tightening cycles. Improvements in labor supply are also contributing to rebalancing the labor market. For instance, since the start of the year, the prime-age labor force participation rate, shown infigure 4, has moved up further. Immigration has also picked up, further contributing to the increase in labor supply. Slowing labor demand and improving labor supply have eased pressure in the labor market, and my expectation is for further gradual easing in labor market conditions, as restrictive monetary policy continues to slow labor demand without causing an abrupt increase in layoffs or the unemployment rate. Aggregate Economic ActivityData we have received so far point to solid economic growth in the third quarter, contrary to expectations earlier this year that the economy would slow. Consumer spending was strong in both July and August. Housing starts, shown infigure 5, are rebounding after a slowdown that was widely seen as caused by higher interest rates. Despite the signs of resilience in the economy this year, some analysts expected slower economic growth this fall, which leads me to the next topic: What are some near-term risks facing the U.S. economy? Risks Facing the U.S. EconomySo far, the economy has been resilient, and inflation has been subsiding; however, I attach a high degree of uncertainty to my outlook and see multiple risks. I am particularly attentive to upside risks to inflation, such as those associated with the economy and labor market remaining too strong to achieve further disinflation, as well as risks associated with unexpected increases in energy prices. Since energy prices are volatile, I tend to look through changes in energy prices and focus more on core inflation in my deliberations. I am mindful that persistent inflation above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent target increases the risk that inflationary expectations become unanchored. Thus, regardless of its source, my objective is to return inflation to the FOMC's 2 percent target. I just mentioned upside risks to inflation, but there are also important downside risks to economic activity, such as the slowdown in foreign economic growth. China's economy appears to have lost momentum as real estate activity has fallen, and other indicators, including retail sales, also suggest softness in economic activity. In Europe, manufacturing and services purchasing managers indexes were both in contractionary territory recently. I am following these developments to the extent that they may have implications for the U.S. economy, especially if conditions deteriorate sharply abroad. On the Transmission of Monetary PolicyAs you know, monetary policy is transmitted to the rest of the economy by affecting broad financial conditions, including market interest rates. Higher market rates raise the interest rates that households and businesses face and reduce the spending they undertake—most notably, spending on business fixed investment, residential construction, and consumer durables. Higher interest rates also affect asset prices. For example, higher interest rates, all else being equal, raise the exchange value of the dollar, which then boosts imports and reduces exports. Additionally, higher interest rates, along with a higher anticipated path of policy, lead investors to discount cash flows associated with longer-term investments at higher rates. This reduces the value of the stock market, which then reduces consumption through wealth effects and business investment through the cost of capital. In addition, monetary policy affects risk premiums.1Tighter monetary policy tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk, increasing yield spreads and reducing the prices for a range of asset classes and augmenting the direct effects on interest rates and asset prices described earlier. Figure 6illustrates how long-term interest rates move in anticipation of changes in the federal funds rate. The red line is the average long-term triple-B corporate bond rate, a measure of corporate borrowing costs. The blue line is the average 30-year mortgage rate, a measure of household borrowing costs. Notice that both measures increased in early 2022 in response to Fed communications and inanticipationof increases in the effective federal funds rate, the black line. Recently, these long-term rates have increased further. More generally financial conditions have tightened further, and real long-term Treasury yields have risen significantly. More on this later. In a speech last spring, I noted that we are still learning about the full effect of our policy tightening in this post-pandemic cycle.2Thus, I am also mindful of factors that could attenuate or delay the transmission of monetary policy. One such factor is that the bulk of corporate debt issued by large firms has not yet had to be refinanced since the FOMC started to tighten monetary policy in March 2022. Large businesses rely on corporate bonds and bank loans as sources of debt financing. Corporate bonds tend to be fixed-rate debt, while bank loans tend to be floating-rate debt. As most nonfinancial corporate debt is in the form of corporate bonds that were issued before 2022, the interest rate averaged across all outstanding corporate debt is still low, as shown infigure 7. This rate will likely increase next year when a larger fraction of maturing corporate bonds needs to be refinanced. Given that this additional tightening is in train, it may be too soon to say confidently that we've tightened enough to return inflation to our 2 percent target. At the same time, I will be mindful of the additional tightening in train because of our past rate hikes as I consider whether there is a need to tighten policy further in the future. This leads me to my next topic: considerations for monetary policy that follow from my economic outlook and risks to it that I have already mentioned. Monetary Policy ConsiderationsAfter increasing the target range for the federal funds rate by 525 basis points since early 2022, my view is that the FOMC is in a position to proceed carefully in assessing the extent of any additional policy firming that may be necessary. We are in a sensitive period of risk management, where we have to balance the risk of not having tightened enough, against the risk of policy being too restrictive. The balancing of these two risks was a good reason for holding the policy rate constant at our most recent FOMC meeting. As I mentioned earlier, real long-term Treasury yields have risen recently. In part, the upward movement in real yields may reflect investors' assessment that the underlying momentum of the economy is stronger than previously recognized and, as a result, a restrictive stance of monetary policy may be needed for longer than previously thought in order to return inflation to 2 percent. But I am also mindful that increases in real yields can arise from changes in investor's attitudes toward risk and uncertainty. Looking ahead, I will remain cognizant of the tightening in financial conditions through higher bond yields and will keep that in mind as I assess the future path of policy. I will be taking financial market developments into account along with the totality of incoming data in assessing the economic outlook and the risks surrounding the outlook and in judging the appropriate future course of policy. Thank you! ReferencesBernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?"Journal of Finance,vol. 60 (June), pp. 1221–57. Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane (1999). "By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 107 (April), pp. 205–51. Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2015). "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 44–76. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2015). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 115 (March), pp. 429–48. Jefferson, Philip N. (2023). "Implementation and Transmission of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the H. Parker Willis Lecture, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., March 27. Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider (2006). "Equilibrium Yield Curves (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 12609. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October (revised January 2007). 1. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Hanson and Stein (2015), and Gertler and Karadi (2015), among others, highlight that monetary policy affects risk premiums. Policy tightening tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk—for example, by reducing expected levels of consumption (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). If policy tightens in response to inflationary shocks, term premiums also tend to rise as longer-maturity bonds become riskier (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2006). Policy tightening can also lower stock prices by increasing the expected equity premium—for example, by weakening the balance sheet of leverage firms and making their stocks riskier.Return to text 2. See Jefferson (2023).Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Economics of Payments XII Conference, Washington D.C. It is a pleasure to welcome you all to this annual conference hosted by the Board for the first time in more than a decade. The payments system is changing, and the agenda for the next two days indicates that this year's conference will tackle a number of topics that are central to this evolution. The Fed plays multiple important roles in the payments system. We provide key services directly to a broad set of commercial banks, credit unions, and to the U.S. Treasury. We maintain accounts for these entities, transfer funds electronically, collect checks, and distribute currency. We also supervise certain financial market infrastructure. Through these functions, we help to ensure that the U.S. payments system meets the needs of consumers and businesses. From its founding, the Federal Reserve played a central role in the payments system. Market disruptions that contributed to financial panics in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were an important impetus for the establishment and design of the Federal Reserve. During the Panic of 1907, some banks refused to clear checks from other banks, creating a crisis in depositor confidence and leading to bank failures. Paul Warburg, an influential figure in banking at the time, argued that the central bank should have a duty to "establish and maintain a perfect system of credit, enabling the general banks to transform cash credits into actual cash with such absolute ease and certainty that the use of cash credit, instead of actual cash, will not cease, no matter what may happen."1 In 1913, Congress did just that by creating the Federal Reserve and assigning it the authority to establish a nationwide check-clearing system. Shortly thereafter, the Fed established a wire transfer service known as Fedwire, and later built on that with the automated clearinghouse (ACH) service in the 1970s. With the launch of FedNow this past summer, we now have an instant payments service. Our job in providing these services and carrying out our responsibilities is to make sure the payments system functions efficiently and resiliently, promoting the kind of confidence that Warburg understood was vital. It is great to see that those of you participating in this conference are taking on the key issues of the day and pushing out the frontier of knowledge with your research. Just yesterday, we had a Board meeting to carry out our statutory responsibilities with respect to setting the debit interchange fee cap. And, of course, we have an interest in the developments around other topics on your agenda, such as stablecoins and crypto. But with just a couple minutes left before the formal proceedings start, I want to draw a connection between two topics on your agenda and two questions that I have. First, how quickly will consumers and businesses demand instant payments? As I mentioned, we recently launched FedNow, our newest payments service. In some ways, what FedNow is doing is not new because it simply executes the operations that happen between when a bank sends an authorized consumer transaction and when that transaction is cleared and settled on the other end. Some of those things happen now with ACH, but with ACH it takes longer. FedNow speeds that process up from, often, a couple days to a couple seconds from initiation to final receipt by consumers and businesses. The launch of FedNow was just one of many steps toward a system where substantially all payments are settled instantly. Banks also have a role in moving us closer to that reality. They will have to adapt their systems to be able to connect to FedNow, and how soon they do that will depend in part on how much their customers demand instant payments. Moving on to my second question, I see that you have a session on central bank digital currency. About two years ago I posed the question: What is the fundamental market failure a central bank digital currency will solve?2I have yet to hear a convincing answer. As I mentioned earlier, the Fed's job is to make sure the payments system functions efficiently. For over 100 years that has meant that the commercial banks and credit unions engage directly with the consumers, while we sit in the back and make sure things clear and settle efficiently. What then are the reasons that support why we should change our role to sitting out front and engaging directly with the consumers? I haven't heard a good answer to that, but I am happy to see that it is a topic being discussed in your conference. With that, I'll step away so that we can get on with the main event. Thank you all for being here today, and I hope you have a great and thought-provoking conference. 1. Paul M. Warburg,. "A United Reserve Bank of the United States,"Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science in the City of New Yorkvol. 1, no. 2 (January 1911): 302-342.Return to text 2. Christopher J. Waller,"CBDC: A Solution in Search of a Problem?"(speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, August 5, 2021).Return to text