Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Barr submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on March 29, 2023. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Scott, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory oversight of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB).1 Our banking system is sound and resilient, with strong capital and liquidity. The Federal Reserve, working with the Treasury Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), took decisive actions to protect the U.S. economy and to strengthen public confidence in our banking system. These actions demonstrate that we are committed to ensuring that all deposits are safe. We will continue to closely monitor conditions in the banking system and are prepared to use all of our tools for any size institution, as needed, to keep the system safe and sound. At the same time, the events of the last few weeks raise questions about evolving risks and what more can and should be done so that isolated banking problems do not undermine confidence in healthy banks and threaten the stability of the banking system as a whole. At the forefront of my mind is the importance of maintaining the strength and diversity of banks of all sizes that serve communities across the country. SVB failed because the bank's management did not effectively manage its interest rate and liquidity risk, and the bank then suffered a devastating and unexpected run by its uninsured depositors in a period of less than 24 hours. SVB's failure demands a thorough review of what happened, including the Federal Reserve's oversight of the bank. I am committed to ensuring that the Federal Reserve fully accounts for any supervisory or regulatory failings, and that we fully address what went wrong. Our first step is to establish the facts—to take an unflinching look at the supervision and regulation of SVB before its failure. This review will be thorough and transparent, and reported to the public by May 1. The report will include confidential supervisory information, including supervisory assessments and exam material, so that the public can make its own assessment.2Of course, we welcome and expect external reviews as well. Why the Bank FailedTo begin, SVB's failure is a textbook case of mismanagement. The bank had a concentrated business model, serving the technology and venture capital sector. It also grew exceedingly quickly, tripling in asset size between 2019 and 2022. During the early phase of the pandemic, and with the tech sector booming, SVB saw significant deposit growth. The bank invested the proceeds of these deposits in longer-term securities, to boost yield and increase its profits.3However, the bank did not effectively manage the interest rate risk of those securities or develop effective interest rate risk measurement tools, models, and metrics. At the same time, the bank failed to manage the risks of its liabilities. These liabilities were largely composed of deposits from venture capital firms and the tech sector, which were highly concentrated and could be volatile. Because these companies generally do not have operating revenue, they keep large balances in banks in the form of cash deposits, to make payroll and pay operating expenses. These depositors were connected by a network of venture capital firms and other ties, and when stress began, they essentially acted together to generate a bank run. The Bank's FailureThe bank waited too long to address its problems, and ironically, the overdue actions it finally took to strengthen its balance sheet sparked the uninsured depositor run that led to the bank's failure. Specifically, on Wednesday, March 8, SVB announced that it realized a $1.8 billion loss in a sale of securities to raise liquidity and planned to raise capital during the following week. Uninsured depositors interpreted these actions as a signal that the bank was in distress. They turned their focus to the bank's balance sheet, and they did not like what they saw. In response, social media saw a surge in talk about a run, and uninsured depositors acted quickly to flee. Depositors withdrew funds at an extraordinary rate, pulling more than $40 billion in deposits from the bank on Thursday, March 9. On Thursday evening and Friday morning, the bank communicated that they expected even greater outflows that day. The bank did not have enough cash or collateral to meet those extraordinary and rapid outflows, and on Friday, March 10, SVB failed. Panic prevailed among SVB's remaining depositors, who saw their savings at risk and their businesses in danger of missing payroll because of the bank's failure. Contagion and the Government's ResponseIt appeared that contagion from SVB's failure could be far-reaching and cause damage to the broader banking system. The prospect of uninsured depositors not being able to access their funds could prompt depositors to question the overall safety and soundness of U.S. commercial banks. There were signs of distress at other banking organizations, and Signature Bank, an FDIC-supervised institution, experienced a deposit run that resulted in the bank's failure. On Sunday, March 12, the Secretary of the Treasury, upon the unanimous recommendation of the boards of the Federal Reserve and the FDIC, approved systemic risk exceptions for the failures of SVB and Signature. This enabled the FDIC to guarantee all of the deposits of both banks. Equity and other liability holders of the two failed banks were not protected and lost their investments. Senior management was immediately removed. In addition, the Federal Reserve (Board), with the Treasury Department's approval, created a temporary lending facility, the Bank Term Funding Program, to allow banks to receive additional liquidity to meet any unexpected depositor demand. The facility allows banks to borrow against safe Treasury and agency securities at par for up to one year. Together with banks' internal liquidity and stable deposits, other external sources, and discount window lending, the new facility provides ample liquidity for the banking system as a whole. Our Review of the Bank's FailureImmediately following SVB's failure, Chair Powell and I agreed that I should oversee a review of the circumstances leading up to SVB's failure. SVB was a state member bank with a bank holding company, and so the Federal Reserve was fully responsible for the federal supervision and regulation of the bank. The California Department of Financial Protection and Innovation—the state supervisor—has announced its own review of its oversight and regulation of SVB. In the Federal Reserve's review, we are looking at SVB's growth and management, our supervisory engagement with the bank, and the regulatory requirements that applied to the bank. As this process is ongoing, I will be limited in my ability to provide firm conclusions, but I will focus on what we know and where we are focusing the review. The picture that has emerged thus far shows SVB had inadequate risk management and internal controls that struggled to keep pace with the growth of the bank. In 2021, as the bank grew rapidly in size, the bank moved into the large and foreign banking organization, or LFBO, portfolio to reflect its larger risk profile and was assigned a new team of supervisors. LFBO firms between $100 billion and $250 billion are subject to some enhanced prudential standards but not at the level of larger banks or global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). Near the end of 2021, supervisors found deficiencies in the bank's liquidity risk management, resulting in six supervisory findings related to the bank's liquidity stress testing, contingency funding, and liquidity risk management.4In May 2022, supervisors issued three findings related to ineffective board oversight, risk management weaknesses, and the bank's internal audit function. In the summer of 2022, supervisors lowered the bank's management rating to "fair" and rated the bank's enterprise-wide governance and controls as "deficient-1." These ratings mean that the bank was not "well managed" and was subject to growth restrictions under section 4(m) of the Bank Holding Company Act.5In October 2022, supervisors met with the bank's senior management to express concern with the bank's interest rate risk profile and in November 2022, supervisors delivered a supervisory finding on interest rate risk management to the bank. In mid-February 2023, staff presented to the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors on the impact of rising interest rates on some banks' financial condition and staff's approach to address issues at banks. Staff discussed the issues broadly, and highlighted SVB's interest rate and liquidity risk in particular. Staff relayed that they were actively engaged with SVB but, as it turned out, the full extent of the bank's vulnerability was not apparent until the unexpected bank run on March 9. Review Focus on SupervisionWith respect to our review, let me start with the supervision of the bank. For all banks but the G-SIBs, the Federal Reserve organizes its supervisory approach based on asset size. The G-SIBs—our largest, most complex banks—are supervised within the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee, or LISCC, portfolio. Banks with assets of $100 billion or more that are not G-SIBs are supervised within the LFBO portfolio. Banks with assets in the $10 to $100 billion range are supervised within the regional banking organization, or RBO, portfolio. Banks with assets of less than $10 billion are supervised within the community banking organization, or CBO, portfolio. As I mentioned, SVB grew exceedingly quickly, moving from the RBO portfolio to the LFBO portfolio in 2021. Banks in the RBO portfolio are supervised by smaller teams that engage with the bank on a quarterly basis and conduct a limited number of targeted exams and a full-scope examination each year.6Banks in the LFBO portfolio are supervised by larger teams that engage with the bank on an ongoing basis. As compared to RBOs, LFBO banks are subject to a greater number of targeted exams, as well as horizontal (cross-bank) exams that assess risks such as capital, liquidity, and cyber security throughout the year.7In addition, banks in the LFBO portfolio are subject to a supervision framework with higher supervisory standards, including heightened standards for capital, liquidity, and governance.8 In our review, we are focusing on whether the Federal Reserve's supervision was appropriate for the rapid growth and vulnerabilities of the bank. While the Federal Reserve's framework focuses on size thresholds, size is not always a good proxy for risk, particularly when a bank has a non-traditional business model. As I mentioned in a speech this month, the Federal Reserve had recently decided to establish a dedicated novel activity supervisory group, with a team of experts focused on risks of novel activities, which should help improve oversight of banks like SVB in the future.9 But the unique nature of this bank and its focus on the technology sector are not the whole story. After all, SVB's failure was brought on by mismanagement of interest rate risk and liquidity risks, which are well-known risks in banking. Our review is considering several questions: Beyond asking these questions, we need to ask why the bank was unable to fix and address the issues we identified in sufficient time. It is not the job of supervisors to fix the issues identified; it is the job of the bank's senior management and board of directors to fix its problems. Review Focus on RegulationLet me now turn to regulation. In 2019, following the passage ofThe Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, the Federal Reserve revised its framework for regulation, maintaining the enhanced prudential standards applicable to G-SIBs but tailoring requirements for all other large banks. At the time of its failure, SVB was a "Category IV" bank, which meant that it was subject to a less stringent set of enhanced prudential standards than would have applied before 2019; they include less frequent stress testing by the Board, no bank-run capital stress testing requirements, and less rigorous capital planning and liquidity risk management standards. SVB was not required to submit a resolution plan to the Federal Reserve, although its bank was required to submit a resolution plan to the FDIC.10And as a result of transition periods and the timing of biennial stress testing, SVB would not have been subject to stress testing until 2024, a full three years after it crossed the $100 billion asset threshold.11 Also in 2019, the banking agencies tailored their capital and liquidity rules for large banks, and as a result, SVB was not subject to the liquidity coverage ratio or the net stable funding ratio.12In addition, SVB was not subject to the supplementary leverage ratio, and its capital levels did not have to reflect unrealized losses on certain securities. All of these changes are in the scope of our review. Specifically, we are evaluating whether application of more stringent standards would have prompted the bank to better manage the risks that led to its failure. We are also assessing whether SVB would have had higher levels of capital and liquidity under those standards, and whether such higher levels of capital and liquidity would have forestalled the bank's failure or provided further resilience to the bank. Ongoing Work to Understand and Address Emerging RisksAs I said a few months ago with regards to capital, we must be humble about our ability—and that of bank managers—to predict how a future financial crisis might unfold, how losses might be incurred, and what the effect of a financial crisis might be on the financial system and our broader economy.13 The failure of SVB illustrates the need to move forward with our work to improve the resilience of the banking system. For example, it is critical that we propose and implement the Basel III endgame reforms, which will better reflect trading and operational risks in our measure of banks' capital needs. In addition, following on our prior advance notice of proposed rulemaking, we plan to propose a long-term debt requirement for large banks that are not G-SIBs, so that they have a cushion of loss-absorbing resources to support their stabilization and allow for resolution in a manner that does not pose systemic risk. We will need to enhance our stress testing with multiple scenarios so that it captures a wider range of risk and uncovers channels for contagion, like those we saw in the recent series of events. We must also explore changes to our liquidity rules and other reforms to improve the resiliency of the financial system. In addition, recent events have shown that we must evolve our understanding of banking in light of changing technologies and emerging risks. To that end, we are analyzing what recent events have taught us about banking, customer behavior, social media, concentrated and novel business models, rapid growth, deposit runs, interest rate risk, and other factors, and we are considering the implications for how we should be regulating and supervising our financial institutions. And for how we think about financial stability. Part of the Federal Reserve's core mission is to promote the safety and soundness of the banks we supervise, as well as the stability of the financial system to help ensure that the system supports a healthy economy for U.S. households, businesses, and communities. Deeply interrogating SVB's failure and probing its broader implications is critical to our responsibility for upholding that mission. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1. This testimony uses "Silicon Valley Bank (SVB)" to refer to both the state member bank, Silicon Valley Bank, and its bank holding company, SVB Financial Group.Return to text 2. Typically, the Board does not disclose confidential supervisory information. We are sharing confidential supervisory information in the case of SVB because the bank went into resolution, and its disorderly failure posed systemic risk.Return to text 3. By year-end 2022, the firm's investment portfolio represented over 55 percent of its total assets.Return to text 4. Supervisory findings include Matters Requiring Attention (MRA) and Matters Requiring Immediate Attention (MRIA). An MRA is "a call for action to address weaknesses that could lead to deterioration in a banking organization's soundness." An MRIA is "a call for more immediate action to address acute or protracted weaknesses that could lead to further deterioration in a banking organization's soundness, may result in harm to consumers, or have caused, or could lead to, noncompliance with laws and regulations." MRAs and MRIAs typically are the first step in communicating supervisory findings to a firm. When a bank has a weakness, supervisors decide whether to assign an MRA or MRIA—and the timeline for remediation—depending on the severity of the issue. The number of MRAs and MRIAs per firm is variable and largely reflects the extent of risk-management weaknesses of a firm. While most MRAs and MRIAs are resolved without further escalation, to the extent not resolved, they can serve as the basis for provisions included in a public enforcement action. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2019), at 21.Return to text 5. 12 U.S.C. § 1843(m), 12 C.F.R. § 225.83. The growth restrictions under section 4(m) apply to the expansion of nonbank activities through merger and acquisition.Return to text 6. A full scope examination is an assessment of safety and soundness of a bank and includes an evaluation of financial condition, risk management and control. A target examination is an assessment of a particular area or risk within a firm.Return to text 7. A horizontal review is an examination in a particular area or risk that is coordinated across several firms. Horizontal reviews also provide a clear picture of the relative risk in an individual firm and allow supervisors to align supervisory expectations with the firm's risk profile. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2019), at 18.Return to text 8. SR letter 12-17 / CA 12-14,"Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions."Return to text 9. Michael S. Barr,"Supporting Innovation with Guardrails: The Federal Reserve's Approach to Supervision and Regulation of Banks' Crypto-related Activities"(speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., March 9, 2023).Return to text 10. Previously, SVB was in the $50 billion to $100 billion category, which under the statutory tailoring framework does not require a resolution plan, stress testing, or liquidity rules.Return to text 11. To be subject to enhanced prudential standards, a bank holding company's assets must exceed $100 billion on a four-quarter rolling average. The phase-in for stress testing is roughly two years and was unchanged by the 2019 rule changes. However, moving to an every-other-year stress test for Category IV firms can result in another year lag if the phase-in period concludes in an odd-numbered year.Return to text 12. The banking agencies include the Board, the FDIC, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.Return to text 13. Michael S. Barr,"Why Bank Capital Matters"(speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C., December 1, 2022).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the National Community Reinvestment Coalition Just Economy Conference, Washington, D.C. (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good morning. Thank you to the National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC) for the invitation to speak with you today. I regret that I cannot be there in person, but I can imagine the energy and excitement in a room full of so many dedicated community development professionals. I appreciate all the work that NCRC members and partner organizations do to advance economic opportunities for people and communities throughout the country, and the role you play in helping to inform public policy. For these brief remarks, I was asked to share my thoughts on the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), a topic of great interest to all of you and to me as well. As you are well aware, the Federal Reserve is working in partnership with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to release a final rule for the CRA. The CRA is one of the seminal laws enacted to address systemic inequities in access to credit and one of the best tools that we, as regulators, have to help ensure banks meet their affirmative obligation to serve the credit needs of the communities in which they do business, including low- and moderate-income communities. CRA has been an area of focus for me for over 25 years. As many of you know, I have had the opportunity to research and write about the CRA and its impact long before joining the Federal Reserve Board. Therefore, I was pleased to be asked by Chair Powell to lead the Fed's efforts, taking the baton from Vice Chair Brainard, as the agencies work together to finalize much-needed updates to the CRA. The three agencies have been inclusive and analytical in their approach to CRA reform. Extensive stakeholder engagement and policy deliberations directly informed our proposal last year. What I will lay out as priorities for CRA reform align with the priorities you have heard previously from the Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC. First, a successful reform of CRA must advance the core purpose of the statute. The law was intended to address inequities in access to credit and promote community engagement and financial inclusion in low- and moderate-income communities. Second, the new CRA rule should address the significant changes in the banking sector since the regulations were last substantially revised more than a quarter century ago. This involves evaluation of online and mobile banking, branchless banking, and hybrid models. Third, the new CRA rule should provide greater clarity, consistency, and transparency so that everyone—the public, community groups, and banks—understands what counts for CRA consideration and how a bank's rating is determined. As you saw in the proposal, the agencies are working to develop a metrics-based approach to CRA evaluations for retail lending and community development financing to bring greater clarity and consistency to CRA examinations, while still ensuring that there is an opportunity to consider qualitative factors to encourage activities that are particularly impactful or responsive. And fourth, the new CRA rule should align evaluations and data collection to bank size and type. One of the strengths of the banking sector is its diversity of institutions, so a modern CRA must accommodate banks of different sizes and business models and ensure that smaller banks do not have the same requirements as large banks with much greater capacity. I know that many of you are eagerly awaiting the new CRA rule. Let me assure you that all three agencies are diligently working together to craft a final rule in light of the extensive public comments we received on our proposal. Once finalized, it is my hope and belief that this new CRA final rule will support more impactful bank lending, investing, and services in today's banking environment for the communities you faithfully serve. I hope you have an excellent conference, and I look forward to interacting with many of you in person so I can learn from you what works to create economic opportunities for families and communities.
The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing a coordinated action to enhance the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements. To improve the swap lines' effectiveness in providing U.S. dollar funding, the central banks currently offering U.S. dollar operations have agreed to increase the frequency of 7-day maturity operations from weekly to daily. These daily operations will commence on Monday, March 20, 2023, and will continue at least through the end of April. The network of swap lines among these central banks is a set of available standing facilitiesand serve as an important liquidity backstop to ease strains in global funding markets, thereby helping to mitigate the effects of such strains on the supply of credit to households and businesses. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Mid-Size Bank Coalition of America, Los Angeles, California (via webcast) Thank you, Raj, and thank you to the coalition for the invitation to be with you—virtually, at least. I don't want to take up too much of the time for our discussion but let me frame a few of the issues around inflation and the economic outlook.1 Last month we received a barrage of data that has challenged my view in January that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) was making significant progress in moderating economic activity and reducing inflation. I'm not the only one whose outlook has shifted. Since the end of January, financial market participants have revised their outlooks in a way that has led them to mark up their expectations for the federal funds rate at the end of 2023 by about a half percentage point. The shift in the data started with a bang on February 1, with a big increase in the number of job openings in December that reversed the gradual easing over several months in what is a key indicator of tightness in the labor market. Part of the FOMC's plan to lower inflation is reducing this excess tightness, which has been driving elevated wage growth and contributing to high inflation. The Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey data can be noisy so, at times, there is a tendency to downplay large moves. But then on February 3, the job report for January showed a stunning 517,000 increase in employment and the unemployment rate moved down to a level not seen in over 50 years.2These data indicated that, instead of loosening, the labor market was tightening.3A little over a week later, on Valentine's Day, instead of a box of chocolates, we got the consumer price index (CPI) inflation report for January and revisions to 2022. By this measure, not only had inflation stopped declining in January, it also slowed a lot less in the second half of last year than previously reported.4Later that week, data on producer prices and last week's report on personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices reinforced these two points. Retail sales for January also came in much stronger than expected, suggesting the economy was slowing less than it had appeared just a month earlier, a picture that was confirmed by data on personal spending, which represents almost 70 percent of gross domestic product. Continuing progress on inflation depends on lowering demand and moderating economic activity, and the retail sales and spending data suggest that progress on reducing aggregate demand may have stalled. Whether or not subsequent data confirm the setback in progress last month, the FOMC will do what is needed to reduce inflation to the Committee's 2 percent objective over time. It is possible there may be some bumps on that path, but I assure you, the FOMC's dual mandate objectives will be achieved. Inflation has been elevated for nearly two years due to an excess of aggregate demand relative to supply. Even though the fiscal stimulus and goods supply constraints that contributed to that imbalance have mostly unwound and the FOMC has rapidly raised the target range for the federal funds rate, the labor market remains very tight and aggregate demand has proved resilient to considerable increases in interest rates. One implication of the strong labor market is that the FOMC's maximum employment goal has been achieved and monetary policy can be utterly focused on fighting inflation. Any fear that we might face two-sided risk in achieving our dual mandate was blown away by the January employment numbers. But an excessively tight labor market complicates the path toward achieving price stability, because wages are growing faster than they have in decades, at a pace that may contribute to keeping inflation elevated. We see this excess pressure in the fast growth of services prices, where labor costs are a higher share of overall input costs and shortages of workers are reportedly most acute. Although inflation has been coming down since the middle of last year, the recent data indicate that we haven't made as much progress as we thought. That assessment goes for both overall inflation, and "core" inflation, which strips out volatile energy and food prices and is a good guide to future price increases. And this holds for both CPI and PCE measures of inflation. Core CPI inflation over the last three months of 2022 was revised up from 3.1 percent (at an annual rate) to now be 4.3 percent. Similarly, the 2022 fourth quarter PCE inflation data was revised from 2.9 percent to 3.6 percent. And the three-month rates increased in January; even measures that trim out the largest and smallest price changes saw increases. These data underscore the view, as laid out in the FOMC's December Summary of Economic Projections, that the fight to bring inflation down to our 2 percent target will be slower and longer than many had expected just a month or two ago. I don't want to brush aside the fact that we have made progress in reducing inflation, and there are indications that further improvement is coming. The three-month inflation rate is running below the 12-month rate, which highlights the progress. And there are reasons to be optimistic about continued improvement, including a sharp deceleration in rent increases since the middle of last year, which will start to get captured in inflation statistics only in the coming months. But recent data suggest that consumer spending isn't slowing that much, that the labor market continues to run unsustainably hot, and that inflation is not coming down as fast as I had thought. It could be that progress has stalled, or it is possible that the numbers released last month were a blip, perhaps associated with unusually favorable weather, and that forthcoming data will show that economic activity and inflation resumed their decline. Fortunately, we will get the next employment report and CPI release ahead of the March 21–22 FOMC meeting, information that will affect my assessment of the appropriate next step for monetary policy. If job creation drops back down to a level consistent with the downward trajectory seen late last year and CPI inflation pulls back significantly from the January numbers and resumes its downward path, then I would endorse raising the target range for the federal funds rate a couple more times, to a projected terminal rate between 5.1 and 5.4 percent.5On the other hand, if those data reports continue to come in too hot, the policy target range will have to be raised this year even more to ensure that we do not lose the momentum that was in place before the data for January were released. I would be very pleased if the data we receive on inflation and the labor market this month show signs of moderation, which would suggest that the February data releases were just a bump in the road and that progress is continuing. But wishful thinking is not a substitute for hard evidence, in the form of economic data. After seeing promising signs of progress, we cannot risk a revival of inflation. Policymakers must remain data dependent, so my view will depend on what the data say. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Some have argued that the large change in payroll employment should be discounted because of unusually warm weather; however, estimates of weather-adjusted employment are also quite large. See Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (2023), "Weather-Adjusted Employment Change," webpage.Return to text 3. Of course, more people finding jobs is good. But in the context of ongoing labor market tightness, this above trend number can complicate efforts to move the economy toward price stability, on which my remarks go into more detail.Return to text 4. Each year, with the release of the January CPI, the Bureau of Labor Statistics recalculates seasonal adjustment factors. This adjustment resulted in noticeable revisions to 2022 seasonally adjusted CPI prices.Return to text 5. This estimate of the terminal rate would align with the central tendency of FOMC participants' projections of the federal funds rate at the end of 2023.Return to text
The Service will Debut with Financial Institutions and the U.S. Treasury on Board CHICAGO – The Federal Reserve announced that the FedNow Service will start operating in July and provided details on preparations for launch. The first week of April, the Federal Reserve will begin the formal certification of participants for launch of the service. Early adopters will complete a customer testing and certification program, informed by feedback from the FedNow Pilot Program, to prepare for sending live transactions through the system. Certification encompasses a comprehensive testing curriculum with defined expectations for operational readiness and network experience. In June, the Federal Reserve and certified participants will conduct production validation activities to confirm readiness for the July launch. "We couldn't be more excited about the forthcoming FedNow launch, which will enable every participating financial institution, the smallest to the largest and from all corners of the country, to offer a modern instant payment solution," said Ken Montgomery, first vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and FedNow program executive. "With the launch drawing near, we urge financial institutions and their industry partners to move full steam ahead with preparations to join the FedNow Service." Many early adopters have declared their intent to begin using the service in July, including a diverse mix of financial institutions of all sizes, the largest processors, and the U.S. Treasury. In addition to preparing early adopters for the July launch, the Federal Reserve continues to engage a range of financial institutions and service providers to complete the testing and certification program and implement the service throughout 2023 and beyond. Montgomery noted that availability of the service is just the beginning, and growing the network of participating financial institutions will be key to increasing the availability of instant payments for consumers and businesses across the country. The FedNow Service will launch with a robust set of core clearing and settlement functionality and value-added features. More features and enhancements will be added in future releases to continue supporting safety, resiliency and innovation in the industry as the FedNow network expands in the coming years. "With the FedNow Service, the Federal Reserve is creating a leading-edge payments system that is resilient, adaptive, and accessible," said Tom Barkin, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and FedNow Program executive sponsor. "The launch reflects an important milestone in the journey to help financial institutions serve customer needs for instant payments to better support nearly every aspect of our economy." About the FedNow ServiceThe Federal Reserve Banks are developing the FedNow Service to facilitate nationwide reach of instant payment services by financial institutions — regardless of size or geographic location — around the clock, every day of the year. Through financial institutions participating in the FedNow Service, businesses and individuals will be able to send and receive instant payments at any time of day, and recipients will have full access to funds immediately, giving them greater flexibility to manage their money and make time-sensitive payments. Access will be provided through the Federal Reserve's FedLine®network, which serves more than 10,000 financial institutions directly or through their agents. For more information, visitFedNowExplorer.org.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, or CDIAC, and the president and vice president of the council for 2023. The CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks and serve three-year terms. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on the CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C. Further information on the CDIAC, including records from their meetings with the Board, can be foundhere. Jeane M. Vidoni, president and chief executive officer of Penn Community Bank, of Perkasie, Pa., will serve as the CDIAC president in 2023. Chuck Sulerzyski, president and chief executive officer of Peoples Bank, Marietta, Ohio, will serve as vice president. Additionally, there are four new members of the CDIAC. The CDIAC member from Minneapolis will be announced at a later date. The new members of the CDIAC are: Daniel P. BerryPresident and Chief Executive OfficerDuke University Federal Credit UnionDurham, N.C. Tyler K. ClinchChief Executive Officer and PresidentFirst Community Bank of East TennesseeKingsport, Tenn. Luanne CundiffPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst State Bank of St. CharlesSt. Charles, Mo. James S. VaccaroChair, President, and Chief Executive OfficerManasquan BankWall Township, N.J. The returning members are: Kim DeVorePresident and Chief Executive OfficerJonah Bank of WyomingCasper, Wyo. Tracy HarrisPresident and Chief Executive OfficerNational Bank and TrustLa Grange, Texas Kent A. LiechtyPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst Bank of BerneBerne, Ind. Janet SilveriaPresident and Chief Executive OfficerCommunity Bank of Santa MariaSanta Maria, Calif. Chuck SulerzyskiPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPeoples BankMarietta, Ohio Kathryn G. UnderwoodPresident and Chief Executive OfficerLedyard National BankHanover, N.H. Jeane M. VidoniPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPenn Community BankPerkasie, Pa. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
To support American businesses and households, the Federal Reserve Board on Sunday announced it will make available additional funding to eligible depository institutions to help assure banks have the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors. This action will bolster the capacity of the banking system to safeguard deposits and ensure the ongoing provision of money and credit to the economy. The Federal Reserve is prepared to address any liquidity pressures that may arise. The additional funding will be made available through the creation of a new Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP), offering loans of up to one year in length to banks, savings associations, credit unions, and other eligible depository institutions pledging U.S. Treasuries, agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, and other qualifying assets as collateral. These assets will be valued at par. The BTFP will be an additional source of liquidity against high-quality securities, eliminating an institution's need to quickly sell those securities in times of stress. With approval of the Treasury Secretary, the Department of the Treasury will make available up to $25 billion from the Exchange Stabilization Fund as a backstop for the BTFP. The Federal Reserve does not anticipate that it will be necessary to draw on these backstop funds. After receiving a recommendation from the boards of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Federal Reserve, Treasury Secretary Yellen, after consultation with the President, approved actions to enable the FDIC to complete its resolutions of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank in a manner that fully protects all depositors, both insured and uninsured. These actions will reduce stress across the financial system, support financial stability and minimize any impact on businesses, households, taxpayers, and the broader economy. The Board is carefully monitoring developments in financial markets. The capital and liquidity positions of the U.S. banking system are strong and the U.S. financial system is resilient. Depository institutions may obtain liquidity against a wide range of collateral through the discount window, which remains open and available. In addition, the discount window will apply the same margins used for the securities eligible for the BTFP, further increasing lendable value at the window. The Board is closely monitoring conditions across the financial system and is prepared to use its full range of tools to support households and businesses, and will take additional steps as appropriate. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Term Sheet: Bank Term Funding Program (PDF) Board Votes Bank Term Funding Program Bank Term Funding Program: Frequently Asked Questions (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Atlantic Community Bankers Bank, Camp Hill, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement dated September 28, 2020 (PDF)Terminated March 1, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: FMB Bancshares, Inc., Lakeland, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated November 11, 2009 (PDF)Terminated February 28, 2023 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr is leading a review of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, in light of its failure. The review will be publicly released by May 1. "The events surrounding Silicon Valley Bank demand a thorough, transparent, and swift review by the Federal Reserve," said Chair Jerome H. Powell. "We need to have humility, and conduct a careful and thorough review of how we supervised and regulated this firm, and what we should learn from this experience," said Vice Chair Barr. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it has fined Wells Fargo & Co., of San Francisco, California, $67.8 million for the firm's unsafe or unsound practices relating to historical inadequate oversight of sanctions compliance risks at its subsidiary bank, Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. Wells Fargo & Co.'s deficient oversight enabled the bank to violate U.S. sanctions regulations by providing a trade finance platform to a foreign bank that used the platform to process approximately $532 million in prohibited transactions between 2010 and 2015. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with an action by the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, which is imposing a separate penalty on Wells Fargo Bank for these violations. The total penalty announced by both agencies is approximately $97.8 million. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday published its order denying the application by Custodia Bank, Inc., of Cheyenne, Wyoming to be supervised by the Federal Reserve. The Boardpreviouslyannounced its denial of the application, and its order is now available following a review for confidential information. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released the 2022 combined annual audited financial statements for the Reserve Banks. An independent public accounting firm engaged by the Board issued unqualified opinions, asserting that its audit found the financial statements for the Board and the Reserve Banks to be free of material misstatements in accordance with the applicable auditing standards. The Board released preliminary income and expense dataearlier this year. Additionally, the Board released individual statements for the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, the Board, and 3 limited liability companies (LLCs) related to lending facilities established to support the Federal Reserve's pandemic response. The audited financial statements provide information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Federal Reserve Banks, the Board, and the LLCs as of December 31, 2022. The Federal Reserve Act requires the Reserve Banks to remit excess earnings to the U.S. Treasury after providing for operating costs, payments of dividends, and any amount necessary to maintain surplus at the statutory limit. During a period when earnings are less than these costs, a deferred asset is recorded, representing a shortfall in earnings from the most recent point that remittances to the Treasury were suspended. During 2022, the Reserve Banks transferred $76.0 billion from weekly earnings as compared to $109 billion in 2021, and in the fall, they first suspended weekly remittances to the Treasury and began accumulating a deferred asset, which totaled $16.6 billion by the end of the year. A deferred asset has no implications for the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy, its operations, or its ability to meet its financial obligations. Additional information in the audited financial statements of the Reserve Banks includes: Total assets of the Reserve Banks as of December 31, 2022, were approximately $8.6 trillion, a decrease of $187.0 billion from the previous year. Total assets were composed primarily of $8.4 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities, and federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise mortgage-backed securities acquired through open market operations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York provides additional detailed information about open market operations and securities holdings on an ongoing basis on itswebsite. The Board engaged KPMG LLP to audit the financial statements of the Reserve Banks and the LLCs in accordance with standards issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, and the audit of the Board's financial statements was also conducted in accordance with the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards. KPMG also conducted audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Reserve Banks and the Board. The Federal Reserve System financial statements are available on the Federal Reserve Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Governor Philip N. Jefferson At the H. Parker Willis Lecture, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Virginia Thank you very much for inviting me to be part of the H. Parker Willis Lecture Series. As you know, Dr. Willis was a distinguished professor here at Washington and Lee University. Among many other accomplishments, he helped create the Federal Reserve System. He served as the first secretary to the Federal Reserve Board from 1914 to 1918 and later as the first research director. Before I go further, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. Many discussions of monetary policy simply talk about the Federal Reserve setting the federal funds rate to promote our goals of maximum employment and price stability, without giving attention to the specific actions we take to put the federal funds rate where we want it—that is, to the way weimplementmonetary policy. And even in economics classes that cover this topic, the teaching materials have not always caught up with the fact that we have purposely changed our implementation framework over the past decade.1My colleagues at the Fed are working with educators to close the curriculum gap, and I hope this lecture will further help this endeavor.2 In honor of Dr. Willis's important contributions to the design and creation of the Federal Reserve, todayI would like to talk to you abouthow the Fed currently uses a specific set of tools to implement monetary policy and how monetary policy is transmitted to the economy. Then, I will offer some concluding remarks. The Federal Funds Market and the Fed's Policy Target RangeAs mandated by the U.S. Congress, the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objectives are to promote maximum employment and price stability. The members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks constitute the FOMC. The FOMC gathers for eight regularly scheduled meetings each year to discuss economic and financial conditions and to deliberate on monetary policy. In each meeting, the FOMC establishes atarget rangefor the federal funds rate.Figure 1shows the upper bound in red and the lower bound in blue of the federal funds target range since 2015. We see the range increasing in 2018 as the job market was strengthening and inflation was movinguptoward 2 percent. That's right—for much of the decade before then, the inflation rate was below 2 percent. In March 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic hit the economy, the FOMC quickly moved the target range down to near zero to support economic activity. Once monetary policy is set, the Fed implements monetary policy by using its policy tools to ensure that the federal funds rate (FFR) stays within the range. The effective federal fund rate is determined by market forces. It is a volume-weighted median of federal funds rates across all borrowers each day. In figure 1, you can see that the Fed has been able to implement monetary policy in such a way that the effective federal funds rate (EFFR), the black line in the figure, has indeed stayed within the target rate range most of the time. To understand how the Fed's tools work, it is important to understand the federal funds market. It is a market where depository institutions borrow funds overnight from certain financial institutions, including other depository institutions and government-sponsored enterprises. These loans are uncollateralized, and the interest rate or cost of the loans is the federal funds rate, which is determined by the supply and demand for reserve balances that financial institutions hold in their "checking accounts" at the Fed.3The Fed can change the total amount of reserves available to the banking system through open market operations or its lending programs. Since the Fed controls the supply of reserves and the amount that it supplies is independent of the interest rate, the supply of reserves is illustrated as a vertical line in the stylized supply and demand curves shown infigure 2.4Later, I will explain why this supply curve intersects the demand curve, as shown in figure 2. The demand curve for reserves in figure 2 has three segments. The top portion of the demand curve is capped by the discount rate that the Fed sets. The middle of the curve is downward sloping, like most demand curves. The higher the interest rate or cost to borrow, the lower the quantity of reserves demanded. The bottom portion is nearly flat because, at some point, banks do not find much benefit from holding additional reserves other than earning the interest on reserve balances (IORB) rate from the Fed. In other words, banks prefer to earn money by making loans to consumers and businesses or purchasing securities only if doing so generates a higher return. In what follows, I will go deeper into the top and bottom segments of the demand curve. Implementation Tool 1: Discount Window Rate Sets a CeilingAt the top of the demand curve, we see the discount rate, which is the interest rate the Fed charges when it lends money to banks.5The discount rate is an administered rate, or a rate set by the Fed, and it is one of the tools the Fed uses to implement monetary policy. It sets a ceiling for the federal funds rate because banks, if they are in good standing and have collateral for the discount window loan, can always borrow overnight funds at the discount rate from the Fed. Therefore, they are not willing to pay a higher rate to borrow funds. In practice, however, banks have demonstrated, in the absence of stress, some reluctance to borrow from the discount window. They are concerned that borrowing from the Fed may indicate that the bank is unable to borrow from other financial institutions, and that it sends a negative signal about their financial condition to the world.6Such dynamics are referred to as the "stigma" associated with the use of the discount window.7Stigma dampens the discount rate's effectiveness as a day-to-day tool the Fed can use to implement monetary policy. Thus, alternative implementation tools are required. This brings me to the next rate I want to talk to you about, the interest rate on reserve balances. Implementation Tool 2: Interest on Reserve BalancesClose to the bottom of the demand curve is the interest on reserve balances rate denoted by IORB rate in figure 2. This is the interest rate the Fed pays on reserveseligible institutionskeep at Federal Reserve Banks.8This interest rate is theprimarytool the Fed uses currently to implement monetary policy.9In the graph, observe that the federal funds rate is close to this rate. The economic force that keeps these two rates close to each other is called arbitrage, the simultaneous purchase and sale of funds (or goods) to profit from a difference in price. Arbitrage keeps prices of financial instruments with similar payoffs close to each other.10I will illustrate how arbitrage works with an example that makes it clear why the federal funds rate cannot be much lower nor much higher than the interest on reserve balances rate. Arbitrage Keeps Rates Close to Each OtherLet's assume that the federal funds rate is 4 percent and the interest on reserves is 4.5 percent. Banks will quickly realize that they can borrow funds in the federal funds market at 4 percent and deposit those funds at the Fed and earn the interest on reserve balances rate of 4.5 percent, which means that they can earn a profit of 0.5 percent (the difference between the two rates).11This riskless investment strategy is called an arbitrage opportunity. As long as this arbitrage opportunity exists, banks will borrow funds in the federal funds market and deposit those funds at the Fed, putting upward pressure on the federal funds rate. This upward pressure will continue until the federal funds rate rises to a level close to the interest on reserves and the arbitrage opportunity no longer exists. A similar logic applies when the federal funds rate is much higher than the interest on reserves.12If this is the case, banks can make money by withdrawing funds from their "checking account" at the Fed and lending that money at the higher federal funds rate. More banks willing to lend money in the federal funds market will put downward pressure on the federal funds rate, causing the federal funds rate to decline toward the interest rate on reserves. Implementation Tool 3: Overnight Reverse Repurchase AgreementSo far, I have talked about two of the Fed's administered rates; the discount rate, and the interest on reserve balances rate. Now, I will talk about the third key administered rate, the overnight reverse repurchase agreement rate denoted by ON RRP in figure 2. Not all institutions that lend money in the federal funds market and who are key players in short-term money markets are eligible to receive interest on reserves. Consider, for example, Federal Home Loan Banks. They were set up in the 1930s to support mortgage lending. Today, they manage about $1.5 trillion in assets. They are major lenders in the federal funds market, but they are ineligible to receive interest on reserves. Therefore, they may have an incentive to lend funds at a much lower rate than the interest rate on reserves rather than earn zero interest on idle cash balances. To ensure that these and other institutions do not charge an interest rate much lower than the interest rate on reserves, the Fed uses an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility as a supplementary policy tool to help control the federal funds rate.13 This facility is open to a broad set of financial institutions, including money market funds (MMFs), government-sponsored enterprises, and banks that are active in financial markets where short-term interest rates are determined. At this facility, institutions agree to buy a Treasury security from the Fed and sell it back the next day. In return, the Fed pays the institution the overnight reverse repurchase rate.14Even though this transaction seems complicated, it is similar to banks depositing reserves at the Fed and receiving interest on them. This transaction, illustrated onslide 5,is equivalent to financial institutions depositing cash at the Fed and the Fed giving them a Treasury security as collateral, paying them the overnight reverse repurchase rate on the deposit, and agreeing to buy back the security the next day. This facility sets a floor for the federal funds rate because not only banks, but other financial institutions can always earn the overnight reverse repurchase agreement rate when lending money to the Fed.15In other words, the interest rate at this facility serves as a reservation rate, or the lowest rate lenders are willing to accept for lending out their cash. Ample ReservesAs I mentioned earlier, the federal funds rate is determined by borrowers and lenders. Infigure 3, it is the point where supply and demand intersect. In this figure, notice that the supply curve is off to the right and it intersects the flat part of the demand curve. This is on purpose because we are currently in what we call an ample-reserves environment.16In this environment, the Fed is supplying an "ample" level of reserves to the banking system, and small movements in the supply curve will not affect the equilibrium federal funds rate much. Instead, as I mentioned earlier, the key tool the Fed uses to implement monetary policy is the interest rate on reserves balances. In figure 3, you can see that by moving the interest rate on reserves down, the Fed shifts the demand for reserves down and affects the federal funds rate even if the demand curve is flat.17A similar mechanism follows by moving the rate up. As suggested by the graph, the FOMC is mindful about adjusting its other administered rates in sync with the interest rate on reserve balances. This practice helps ensure arbitrage works to shift the demand curve as indicated. Implementation Tool 4: Open Market OperationsSo far, I have talked about how the Fed influences the demand curve by changing its administered rates. Now, I will talk about how the Fed shifts the supply of reserves in the system. It does so by buying or selling securities, so-called open market operations. When the Fed purchases securities, it pays for them by depositing cash into the appropriate banks' reserve balance accounts, adding to the overall level of reserves (cash) in the banking system. Before 2008, open market operations were the Fed's primary monetary policy tool because there were limited reserves in the banking system, a so-called scarce-reserves regime. In a scarce-reserves environment, the supply curve intersects the demand curve on the downward-sloping part of the demand curve, as illustrated in the left panel offigure 4. Open market operations are the tool old textbooks emphasize. The Fed would inject or drain reserves through open market operations to keep the vertical supply curve at the desired location—where it intersects the demand curve at the intended federal funds rate. Since the supply of reserves naturally changes—for example, because of the withdrawal of reserves into physical currency—the Fed conducted these operations frequently. Today, being in an ample-reserves regime, the Fed operates on a different segment of the demand curve and uses different tools, as illustrated in the right panel of figure 4. Technical Adjustments to the Supply of Reserves: A Case StudyAlthough active management of the supply of reserves is not, by design, a feature of an ample-reserves regime, there are times when the Fed may take steps to adjust the supply of reserves to support interest rate control. For example, in mid-September 2019, strains in funding markets emerged as quarterly corporate tax payments and the settlement of Treasury securities coincided and resulted in a large amount of cash being drained from short-term interest rate investments. In fact, reserve balances fell more than $100 billion over just two days. Although the drain in reserves associated with seasonal tax payments was expected to put some upward pressure on short-term interest rates, the increases in rates that materialized were exceptionally large by historical standards. One such interest rate is the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, a broad measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight collateralized by Treasury securities. As shown infigure 5, the blue dashed line denoted as SOFR spiked, and the effective federal funds rate, the red solid line, moved 5 basis pointsabovethe target range during this episode. In response to these market developments the Fed undertook open market operations to purchase securities to add reserves temporarily. Specifically, the Fed conducted repurchase agreement (repo) transactions to provide immediate liquidity to the market and help alleviate the funding strains, ensuring the federal funds rate resumed trading within the target range. In addition, the FOMC judged that the prevailing level of reserve supply at that time may have been a bit too low to be consistent with operating in an ample-reserves regime. Accordingly, in early October 2019, the FOMC directed the Fed to maintain over time reserve balances at least as large as the level that had prevailed in "early September," a time when there were no evident pressures in money markets.18 The Fed's Balance SheetThe Fed's balance sheet contains a great deal of information about the scale and scope of its open market operations.Figure 6shows the evolution of the Fed's balance sheet, where the holdings of U.S. Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and other securities are recorded as assets and reserve balances are recorded as liabilities. Both series are divided by gross domestic product because the Fed's balance sheet should naturally increase over time with economic growth. We entered the ample-reserves regime in 2008, during the 2007–09 financial crisis, as the Fed sharply increased its total assets. In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, there was another sharp increase in total assets. In both instances, the Fed reduced its interest rate target near zero and purchased securities, injecting reserves into the banking system. The effect of purchasing securities was to reduce longer-term interest rates to support the economy. The expansion of the Fed's balance sheet is popularly known as quantitative easing (QE). When QE ended, the Fed reinvested any maturing securities it held to maintain the size of the balance sheet. Now, the Fed is fighting inflation by raising its interest rate target range and is in the process of shrinking the Fed's balance sheet, which is referred to as quantitative tightening (QT), by passively stopping the reinvestment in some maturing Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS).19 Summary of ToolsI've talked about how the Fed has four tools in its toolbox to implement monetary policy. Three of the tools and their associated administered rates, shown in green text onslide 10, are used to steer the market-determined federal funds rate into the FOMC's target range. These tools also interact with other short-term market interest rates through arbitrage relationships. The fourth tool, shown in blue text, is open market operations—the purchase and sale of government securities—which is used to adjust the supply of reserves in the banking system. Monetary Policy TransmissionNow that you understand the Fed's implementation tools, let's see how the Fed uses them to achieve its two mandated goals: maximum employment and price stability. Currently, the unemployment rate is low, and the inflation rate is above the Fed's 2 percent target. Beginning in the second half of 2021, as the magnitude and persistence of the increase in inflation became clearer and as the job market recovery accelerated, the FOMC pivoted toward a tighter stance of monetary policy. In March 2022, the FOMC increased its target range for the federal funds rate, for the first time since the onset of the pandemic. In June 2022, we began the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, after announcing our plans in May. Monetary policy is transmitted to the rest of the economy by affecting financial market prices, such as long-term interest rates, which in turn affect the decisions of households and businesses. Previously, I discussed how changes in the federal funds target range are transmitted to short-term interest rates, such as the overnight reverse repo rates, through arbitrage relationships. Short-term interest rates, in turn, affect long-term interest rates through investors' expectations. More specifically, according to the expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates, intermediate- and long-term interest rates are the weighted average of expected future short-term interest rates.20In addition, monetary policy affects risk premiums. Tighter monetary policy tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk, making them less willing to invest in long-term assets, which means that their return (interest rate) must increase for investors to buy these assets.21 Figure 7illustrates how long-term interest rates, which are widely viewed as important for businesses' and households' economic decisions, move in anticipation of changes in the federal funds rate. The red line is the average 10-year triple-B corporate bond rate. It is a measure of corporate borrowing costs. The blue line is the average 30-year mortgage rate. It is a measure of household borrowing costs. Notice that both measures increased in early 2022 in response to Fed communications and inanticipationof increases in the effective federal funds rate, the black line. Higher long-term interest rates increase the cost of borrowing money for households and businesses. Therefore, high interest rates raise the incentive to save, which in turn dampens consumer spending on interest rate-sensitive expenditures, like housing and automobiles, and slows businesses' investment in new equipment. The decrease in spending decreases the overall demand for goods and services in the economy, thereby reducing the demand/supply imbalances we have seen, and, consequently, reduce inflationary pressures. As a result, the inflation rate should fall back toward 2 percent, the FOMC's inflation rate target. A key question is how much the tightening of financial conditions since late 2021 has contributed to reducing aggregate demand and inflationary pressures. Infigure 8, you can see that inflation, measured using the personal consumption expenditures price index, has started to come down. Some of the disinflation, or reduction in the inflation rate, is due to monetary policy tightening, and some of this disinflation is due to other factors, such as supply chain bottlenecks easing and falling energy prices. Chair Powell and other colleagues in the Federal Reserve System have pointed out that monetary policy affects the economy and inflation with long, variable, and highly uncertain lags, and we are still learning about the full effect of our tightening thus far.22 ConclusionInconclusion, the Fed has a congressional mandate of maximum employment and price stability. The FOMC conducts monetary policy by setting the target range for the federal funds rate. Then, the Fed uses its monetary policy tools to implement the policy, which guides market interest rates toward the Fed's desired setting of policy. The Fed implements monetary policy using administered rates. The interest rate on reserve balances is the Fed's primary tool for adjusting the federal funds rate. The overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility is a supplementary tool that sets a floor for the federal funds rate. The discount rate serves as a ceiling for the federal funds rate. The Fed ensures that the banking system has ample reserves, using open market operations, if needed. Currently, we are tightening monetary policy. Changes in the federal funds rate are transmitted to other interest rates through arbitrage and by affecting investors' expectations. Changes in interest rates affect the decisions of consumers and businesses with a lag. Their decisions ultimately move the economy toward maximum employment and price stability. Thank you. ReferencesAfonso, Gara, Domenico Giannone, Gabriele La Spada, and John C. Williams (2022)."Scarce, Abundant, or Ample? A Time-Varying Model of the Reserve Demand Curve," (PDF)Staff Report 1019. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May. Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?"Journal of Finance,vol. 60 (June), pp. 1221–57. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018)."Overnight Reverse Repurchase Agreement Facility,"webpage, January 3. ——— (2019a)."Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization,"press release, January 30. ——— (2019b)."Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation,"press release, October 11. ——— (2022)."Discount Window Lending,"webpage, December 30. ——— (2023)."Bank Term Funding Program,"webpage, March 16. Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane (1999). "By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 107 (April), pp. 205–51. Carlson, Mark, and Jonathan D. Rose (2017)."Stigma and the Discount Window,"FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 19. Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2023)."FAQs: Reverse Repurchase Agreement Operations,"webpage, February 22. Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2015). "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 44–76. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2015). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 115 (March), pp. 429–48. Ihrig, Jane, and Scott Wolla (2022a). Interview by Adrian Ma and Darian Woods,"AP Macro Gets a Makeover,"The Indicator from Planet Money,NPR, August 15. Ihrig, Jane, and Scott Wolla (2022b)."Let's Close the Gap: Updating the Textbook Treatment of Monetary Policy,"Journal of Economic Education. Ihrig, Jane, Zeynep Senyuz, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2020)."The Fed's 'Ample Reserves' Approach to Implementing Monetary Policy,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-022. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February (revised March 2020). King, Robert G., and André Kurmann (2002). "Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: Evidence and Implications," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,Economic Quarterly,vol. 88 (Fall), pp. 49–95. Lopez-Salido, David, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2023). "Reserve Demand, Interest Rate Control, and Quantitative Tightening," Working Paper. Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider (2006)."Equilibrium Yield Curves,"NBER Working Paper Series 12609. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October (revised January 2007). 1. See the NPR interview with Jane Ihrig and Scott Wolla (2022a).Return to text 2. Some of the teaching materials that Jane Ihrig and Scott Wolla have created to close the curriculum gap are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website athttps://www.stlouisfed.org/education/teaching-new-tools-of-monetary-policy. For more information, please see Ihrig and Wolla (2022b).Return to text 3. An uncollateralized or unsecured loan is a loan that does not require any type of collateral. In contrast, a collateralized or secured loan is a loan that is backed by collateral, meaning something the borrower owns (collateral), such as U.S. Treasury securities, can be taken by the lender in case the borrower does not pay back the loan under the agreed terms.Return to text 4. The Fed understands that several factors affect the supply of reserves and that it can choose what operations to take, if any, in response. As a result, one should think of the Fed as controlling the supply of reserves in the banking system. For a detailed discussion of supply and demand of reserves, see Ihrig, Senyuz, and Weinbach (2020).Return to text 5. Depository institutions have access to three types of discount credit from their regional Federal Reserve Bank: primary credit, secondary credit, and seasonal credit, each with its own interest rate. We use the term "discount rate" as a shorthand for primary credit rate. Most credit at the discount window is done at the primary credit rate. For more information, please refer to Board of Governors (2022).Return to text 6. The list of banks that borrow money from the discount window is published with a two-year delay. Discount window borrowing increased recently following the failure of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. On March 12, 2023, the Fed announced a Bank Term Funding Facility to complement the funding available at the discount window; see Board of Governors (2023).Return to text 7. For a detailed discussion about the stigma associated with discount window borrowing, please see Carlson and Rose (2017).Return to text 8. Section 19(b)(2) of the Federal Reserve Act requires each depository institution to maintain reserves against certain liabilities of the bank. The Board's Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions in title 12, part 204, of theCode of Federal Regulations) implements the reserve requirements provisions in section 19. Eligible institutions include depository institutions and certain other institutions as specified in the act; see the definition in 12 C.F.R. § 204.2 athttps://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-12/chapter-II/subchapter-A/part-204/section-204.2#p-204.2(y).Return to text 9. On October 6, 2008, the Fed started to pay interest on reserves of eligible institutions with master accounts at Federal Reserve Banks. Up to and including July 28, 2021, interest was paid on required reserves at an IORR (interest on required reserves) rate and at an IOER (interest on excess reserves) rate. The IORR rate was paid on balances maintained to satisfy reserve balance requirements, and the IOER rate was paid on excess balances. Effective March 24, 2020, the Board amended Regulation D to set all reserve requirement ratios for transaction accounts to 0 percent, eliminating all reserve requirements. As a result, there is no longer a need to describe interest rates based on whether the balance satisfies a reserve balance requirement. To account for those changes, the Board approved a final rule amending Regulation D to replace references to an IORR rate and to an IOER rate with references to a single IORB rate.Return to text 10. This idea is called the law of one price, and it assumes that markets are competitive—that is, investors cannot manipulate prices to their advantage—and the absence of trade restrictions and trading costs.Return to text 11. This profit calculation assumes operational and regulatory costs are zero.Return to text 12. For the arbitrage strategies described earlier to work, the system needs to have sufficient reserves and enough competition among banks.Return to text 13. The Fed introduced the ON RRP facility in September 2013 and conducted test operations through late 2015. In September 2014, the FOMC indicated that it intended to use the facility as needed to help control the federal funds rate. For more information, see Board of Governors (2018) and Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2023).Return to text 14. The interest rate that a counterparty receives is the facility's offering rate except in the highly unlikely event that the amount of propositions the Fed receives exceeds the amount of securities available for the operation. In that case, the interest rate would be determined by an auction process conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as described in Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2023).Return to text 15. For banks eligible to receive the IORB rate, the IORB rate is their reservation rate, and it explains why the federal funds market is currently dominated by nonbank lenders with the EFFR remaining below the IORB rate.Return to text 16. In January 2019, the Fed announced that "the Committee intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve's administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required." See Board of Governors (2019a, para 2). Afonso and others (2022), among others, investigate how to identify ample-reserves regimes.Return to text 17. In periods when reserves are ample, there might be an increase in overnight reverse repurchase activity following an increase in reserve supply because nonbank financial institutions absorb liquidity that banks find costly to hold on their balance sheet because of regulatory capital rules. If a prime MMF lends money to a bank in the federal funds market instead of lending it money in the ON RRP facility, the bank increases its liabilities (borrowing from the prime MMF) and assets (reserves), which expands its balance sheet. It will affect the banks' various regulatory ratios and count toward calculating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation fee.Return to text 18. For more details on this event, please see Ihrig, Senyuz, and Weinbach (2020) and Board of Governors (2019b, para. 2).Return to text 19. Lopez-Salido and Vissing-Jorgensen (2023) provide a framework for understanding banks' demand for central bank reserves and assess how much QT is feasible to maintain an ample-reserves environment.Return to text 20. Strictly speaking, the expectations theory states that long-term interest rates are entirely governed by the expected future path of short-term interest rates. While this theory has strong implications that have been rejected in many studies, it nonetheless contains important elements of truth. For a review of the empirical evidence and implications, please see King and Kurmann (2002).Return to text 21. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Hanson and Stein (2015), and Gertler and Karadi (2015), among others, highlight that monetary policy affects risk premiums. Policy tightening tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk—for example, by reducing expected levels of consumption (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). If policy tightens in response to inflationary shocks, term premiums also tend to rise as longer-maturity bonds become riskier (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2006). Policy tightening can also lower stock prices by increasing the expected equity premium—for example, by weakening the balance sheet of leverage firms and making their stocks riskier.Return to text 22. Assessing the timing and magnitude of the effects of monetary policy on economic activity and inflation is both important and difficult. The challenges arise because monetary policy both responds to and influences key macroeconomic variables, because the structure of the economy may change over time, and because no two economic episodes are precisely the same. While a common theme in the economic literature is that economic activity and inflation fall in response to a tightening monetary policy shock, the estimated size and timing of the maximum effects on activity and on inflation vary substantially across studies.Return to text Accessible Version
Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Washington, DC -- The following statement was released by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen, Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell, and FDIC Chairman Martin J. Gruenberg: Today we are taking decisive actions to protect the U.S. economy by strengthening public confidence in our banking system. This step will ensure that the U.S. banking system continues to perform its vital roles of protecting deposits and providing access to credit to households and businesses in a manner that promotes strong and sustainable economic growth. After receiving a recommendation from the boards of the FDIC and the Federal Reserve, and consulting with the President, Secretary Yellen approved actions enabling the FDIC to complete its resolution of Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, California, in a manner that fully protects all depositors. Depositors will have access to all of their money starting Monday, March 13. No losses associated with the resolution of Silicon Valley Bank will be borne by the taxpayer. We are also announcing a similar systemic risk exception for Signature Bank, New York, New York, which was closed today by its state chartering authority. All depositors of this institution will be made whole. As with the resolution of Silicon Valley Bank, no losses will be borne by the taxpayer. Shareholders and certain unsecured debtholders will not be protected. Senior management has also been removed. Any losses to the Deposit Insurance Fund to support uninsured depositors will be recovered by a special assessment on banks, as required by law. Finally, the Federal Reserve Board on Sunday announced it will make available additional funding to eligible depository institutions to help assure banks have the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors. The U.S. banking system remains resilient and on a solid foundation, in large part due to reforms that were made after the financial crisis that ensured better safeguards for the banking industry. Those reforms combined with today's actions demonstrate our commitment to take the necessary steps to ensure that depositors' savings remain safe.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At The Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets Workshop on Market Dysfunction, Chicago, Illinois Thanks, Anil. It's a pleasure to be with you today and to be part of this discussion on how central banks can support the effective functioning of financial markets.1 Financial stability is essential for a well-functioning economy. A financial system is considered stable when its markets and institutions are resilient and able to function even following a severe shock. The Federal Reserve monitors risks to financial stability and uses its supervisory and regulatory tools to mitigate the risks and consequences of financial instability. During periods of financial system stress, the Federal Reserve can use additional tools, such as lending facilities and open market operations, to directly support the effective functioning of key financial markets and the flow of credit throughout the economy. The onset of the global pandemic in the spring of 2020 was a severe shock both to financial markets and to the U.S. economy, and the Federal Reserve responded forcefully to support market functioning and the flow of credit. To address the liquidity strains in Treasury and repo markets, the Fed directly purchased large amounts of Treasury securities and conducted term and overnight repo operations using the FOMC's open market operations authority. To address strains in other markets, with the backing of the U.S. Treasury, the Fed used its 13(3) emergency lending authority to establish a number of facilities to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities.2The Federal Reserve also took a number of other actions, including easing terms on discount window lending and supervisory and regulatory actions, to encourage banks to lend and act as market intermediaries.3 The Fed's actions were effective in restoring financial market functioning, but the channels through which they operated varied. Significant asset purchases and take-up of the Fed's repo operations were required to restore smooth functioning in Treasury markets because of the liquidity needs of a wide swath of investors. By comparison, many of the 13(3) lending facilities saw relatively limited take-up, but they helped support market functioning and the supply of credit in the targeted markets by offering a backstop and bolstering investor confidence.4 The pandemic lending programs that experienced more usage saw a decline in use as market functioning was restored, which is a key benefit of lending programs compared with asset purchases. Moreover, shorter-term loans under these programs were relatively quick to roll off the Fed's balance sheet. In fact, most of the lending programs expired by late 2020. And some of the emergency securities purchase programs, such as the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility, sold the securities they had purchased during their wind-down phases. The pandemic experience demonstrated the effectiveness of lending programs designed to serve as backstops to support market functioning and the flow of credit in times of stress. The temporary nature of loans from lending facilities activated only under financial market stress adds to the attractiveness of these tools. Lending programs are most effective as backstops when loans are offered at a penalty rate and are of short duration. When appropriately calibrated, lending programs can help promote market functioning but limit the Federal Reserve's overall footprint in financial markets in the longer term. The pandemic experience illustrated that liquidity strains can sometimes be so severe that targeted purchases of the affected assets may be the most effective tool to quickly support market functioning, as was the case in Treasury markets in the spring of 2020. In taking this step, a key issue for central banks to consider is how to clearly distinguish asset purchases from the central bank's monetary policy actions.5This would be especially important during a period of monetary policy tightening, as we are currently experiencing. A related issue is how to minimize the Fed's footprint and amount of asset purchases needed to restore market functioning. A further consideration is how to construct and communicate an exit strategy to reduce the enlarged balance sheet over time. Finally, while it is important to consider the design of central bank tools to address future episodes of severe financial market dysfunction, it is also important for central banks and other agencies to ensure that regulations and market oversight foster prudent financial institution behavior and resiliency in core financial markets. Doing so can increase the ability of private markets and institutions to function during times of stress and reduce the likelihood of future market interventions by the central bank. In this regard, it is important for the Federal Reserve to engage along with the other agencies in a thoughtful consideration of possible regulatory adjustments and structural reforms to increase the resiliency of the Treasury markets and reduce the likelihood of future market dysfunction.6 Thank you, again, for the opportunity to chair this panel. I look forward to our discussion. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The Fed also used its open market operations authority to purchase agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities and conducted repo operations with an expanded set of global counterparties. Some of the 13(3) facilities were versions of those that had been used during the 2008 financial crisis and others were new, such as corporate credit facilities, which directly purchased corporate bonds to support the flow of credit to the economy. All 13(3) lending facilities require the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury. For further details, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), "Funding, Credit, Liquidity, and Loan Facilities," webpage.Return to text 3. For a further description of these actions, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), "Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19," webpage.Return to text 4. For a discussion of the 13(3) lending facilities and their usage, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November).Return to text 5. This issue is most relevant when the assets purchases are those that the Fed can purchase using its open market operations authority, including Treasury and agency debt and agency-backed mortgage-backed securities. Programs to purchase other types of debt would need the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act.Return to text 6. For a discussion of potential reforms, see Inter-Agency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance (2021),Recent Disruptions and Potential Reforms in the U.S. Treasury Market: A Staff Progress Report(PDF)(Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, November); and Inter-Agency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance (2022),Enhancing the Resilience of the U.S. Treasury Market: 2022 Staff Progress Report(PDF)(Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, November).Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on March 8, 2023. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Scott, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation is causing significant hardship, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. Over the past year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening so far are yet to be felt. Even so, we have more work to do. Our policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of labor market conditions that benefit all. I will review the current economic situation before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookThe data from January on employment, consumer spending, manufacturing production, and inflation have partly reversed the softening trends that we had seen in the data just a month ago. Some of this reversal likely reflects the unseasonably warm weather in January in much of the country. Still, the breadth of the reversal along with revisions to the previous quarter suggests that inflationary pressures are running higher than expected at the time of our previous Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting. From a broader perspective, inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year but remains well above the FOMC's longer-run objective of 2 percent. The 12-month change in total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices has slowed from its peak of 7 percent in June to 5.4 percent in January as energy prices have declined and supply chain bottlenecks have eased. Over the past 12 months, core PCE inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy prices, was 4.7 percent. As supply chain bottlenecks have eased and tighter policy has restrained demand, inflation in the core goods sector has fallen. And while housing services inflation remains too high, the flattening out in rents evident in recently signed leases points to a deceleration in this component of inflation over the year ahead. That said, there is little sign of disinflation thus far in the category of core services excluding housing, which accounts for more than half of core consumer expenditures. To restore price stability, we will need to see lower inflation in this sector, and there will very likely be some softening in labor market conditions. Although nominal wage gains have slowed somewhat in recent months, they remain above what is consistent with 2 percent inflation and current trends in productivity. Strong wage growth is good for workers but only if it is not eroded by inflation. Turning to growth, the U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real gross domestic product rising at a below-trend pace of 0.9 percent. Although consumer spending appears to be expanding at a solid pace this quarter, other recent indicators point to subdued growth of spending and production. Activity in the housing sector continues to weaken, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight. The unemployment rate was 3.4 percent in January, its lowest level since 1969. Job gains remained very strong in January, while the supply of labor has continued to lag.1As of the end of December, there were 1.9 job openings for each unemployed individual, close to the all-time peak recorded last March, while unemployment insurance claims have remained near historical lows. Monetary PolicyWith inflation well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent and with the labor market remaining extremely tight, the FOMC has continued to tighten the stance of monetary policy, raising interest rates by 4-1/2 percentage points over the past year. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet.2 We are seeing the effects of our policy actions on demand in the most interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the Committee slowed the pace of interest rate increases over its past two meetings. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, taking into account the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. Although inflation has been moderating in recent months, the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go and is likely to be bumpy. As I mentioned, the latest economic data have come in stronger than expected, which suggests that the ultimate level of interest rates is likely to be higher than previously anticipated. If the totality of the data were to indicate that faster tightening is warranted, we would be prepared to increase the pace of rate hikes. Restoring price stability will likely require that we maintain a restrictive stance of monetary policy for some time. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Federal Reserve will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions. 1. A box in our latestMonetary Policy Report,"Why Has the Labor Force Recovery Been So Slow?" discusses the factors that have been holding back labor supply.Return to text 2. A box in our latestMonetary Policy Report,"Developments in the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Money Markets," discusses changes in the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.Return to text
The following statement was released by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell: "We welcome the announcements by the Swiss authorities today to support financial stability. The capital and liquidity positions of the U.S. banking system are strong, and the U.S. financial system is resilient. We have been in close contact with our international counterparts to support their implementation."
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. I'm here today to discuss what we have learned from the recent turmoil in the crypto sector and what role supervision and regulation should play in helping banks manage their engagement with the sector and the innovative technologies that support it. Despite recent events, we have not lost sight of the potential transformative effect that these technologies could have on our financial system. And we need to be careful lest regulation lock in the power of incumbents or stifle innovation. But the benefits of innovation can only be realized if appropriate guardrails are in place. I am going to talk about how we are working to provide clarity to the banks we supervise about what we have learned and about our supervisory expectations. I will wrap up by sharing some thoughts on stablecoins.1 It isn't hard to find evidence for the need to discuss crypto, but let me start with a recent personal experience. Last month, I visited the Mississippi Delta to talk about financial inclusion and community development, and I spent a morning talking with a group of college students. When I asked, it turned out that most of the students I met owned some crypto-assets. This surprised me because in my experience as a professor, most college students are usually strapped for cash. What didn't surprise me is that many of those who said they owned crypto-assets also said they had lost money, and they weren't very happy about that. It was a reminder for me that crypto-assets aren't just held by people with ample money for speculation. A fifth of Americans, many of them with limited savings, say they have owned some form of crypto.2The problems that have come to light in the crypto sector over the past year may have affected a large segment of the public. When I think about how to approach crypto-assets, the technology behind them, and the interaction between the crypto sector and traditional financial system, I find it helpful to place recent innovation in historical context. Innovation in financial markets has long raised questions about the appropriate role of regulation. Of particular concern is how the regulatory framework can serve both to encourage innovation and to support the safety and soundness of financial institutions and broader financial stability. Just as important is the need to protect the public from fraud and other abusive behavior. The challenge here begins with a mismatch in timing. Innovation often comes quickly, but it takes time for consumers to become aware that they could both gainand losemoney on new financial products. It may take time for market participants to understand attendant risks and come up with tools to manage them. Likewise, regulation involves a deliberative process—as it should because it needs to balance the risk that over-regulation will stifle innovation with the risk that under-regulation will allow for substantial harm to households and the financial system. Long before crypto became an issue for regulation and public policy, I was grappling with how to think about the cycle of innovation in the context of the Global Financial Crisis. New products often develop slowly at first while market participants are unsure of their value or their risks, but excitement and enthusiasm can then lead to rapid growth and new products flood the market as a result.3Participants assume too quickly that they know how the new products work, and novel products can appear both safe and lucrative, particularly if they have not been tested through bouts of market stress. The innovation cycle turns when this mismatch—between perceived understanding of risk and actual underlying risk—becomes apparent. Back then, I was talking about some of the causes and consequences of the financial crisis. At that time, new types of financial products had become so intertwined with the banking and broader financial system that the turn in the innovation cycle resulted in devastating consequences for homeowners, workers, businesses, and our economy. Today, while the crypto-asset sector is more nascent and less pervasive, the questions about how new financial products will affect the public, the economy, and financial stability are similar. Innovation surges ahead, and regulation follows, trying to balance benefits and risks. The Potential Benefits of Innovative TechnologiesBefore I get into how we are responding to developments in the crypto sector in our approach to supervision and regulation, I want to recognize the potential public benefits of the technologies underlying crypto-assets. It is often argued that these technologies will have extensive beneficial application beyond crypto-assets themselves. The payments system is critical to everyday Americans. It is highly resilient but also can be slow and expensive. This is particularly true with respect to cross-border payments. The technology underlying crypto assets—including that which enables programmability—could bring new functionality or efficiencies to payments systems. Proponents claim that distributed ledger technology, encryption, and new ways of validating transactions could be used to facilitate faster reconciliation, clearing, and settlement and reduce costs for a variety of traditional asset transactions—including, for example, by linking securities and cash markets in ways that are more difficult to achieve under our current financial infrastructure.4Use of smart contracts could automate certain actions, creating further efficiencies. Such use of the technology could lead to potential operational efficiencies and reduced costs. The Federal Reserve has dedicated considerable resources to exploring and understanding these technologies and their potential benefits as well as the risks associated with these innovations. A Few Lessons from the "Crypto Winter"In contrast to the potential benefits of these technologies, there is the actual experience of the many people whose hope and enthusiasm for crypto-assets have met with disappointment and sometimes devastating loss. Robert Shiller describes how Bitcoin is a prime example of what he calls a contagious economic narrative. The story of Bitcoin's value proposition taps into the fears of government control with the promise that, through superior technology, a new product can yield untold riches.5But when it comes to certain crypto-assets, some of which have no intrinsic value beyond the faith of their owners, the law of gravity will eventually apply, as it did with the tulip frenzy in Holland more than 400 years ago. Experience has shown that crypto-assets can face the same fundamental liquidity and credit risks as traditional assets, and can be highly correlated with other traditional risks, rather than being hedges against such risks. While purveyors of crypto-assets have represented to customers that they are protected through the decentralized nature of the underlying technology, customers are often at a greater risk because those purveyors often find ways to function outside a robust supervisory and regulatory system. In the absence of regulatory compliance, customers don't have the information they need to assess and mitigate their risks. Investors do not have the structural protections they have relied on for many decades. As a result, many have been victims of classic cases of fraud and abuse—some appropriately classified as "Ponzi schemes" under a high-tech veneer. Moreover, while crypto-assets are hyped as "decentralized," there has been an emergence of new, quite centralized intermediaries that are either not subject to or not compliant with appropriate regulation and supervision, which has perpetuated harm to consumers. Complicating matters further, these entities often seek out jurisdictions with loose or less developed legal and regulatory frameworks for financial activities. And the lack of consolidated home country supervision and coordination with host country supervisors rekindles the kind of abuses that bank regulators long ago quashed. While such cross jurisdictional regulatory arbitrage is not new, the digital nature of these activities provides for greater opportunity to expand the reach of such entities to customers around the world. For example, the prominent collapse of the FTX crypto-asset trading platform has reportedly wiped out the holdings of a million people, costing them billions of dollars.6Unfortunately, that is not the only example. Since last summer, we saw the collapse of one crypto intermediary after another.7As these cases are working their way through the bankruptcy courts, we are seeing indications of misuse of client funds, misrepresentations, obfuscation about availability of deposit insurance, and potential fraud. Crypto has also been implicated in numerous cases of illicit financing. Crypto-assets pose significant money laundering and terrorism financing risks due to the pseudonymous actors that are parties to transactions, the ease and speed of transfer, and the general irrevocability of transactions—all of which make crypto-assets attractive for use in money laundering and terrorist financing. Indeed, enforcement agencies—including the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the Office of Foreign Assets Control, and the Department of Justice—have taken numerous public enforcement actions against entities or individuals dealing in crypto-assets.8 This kind of behavior can cause substantial harm to investors and consumers as well as to our financial system. The federal bank regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve Board, have a statutory responsibility to ensure that the activity of the entities we supervise is conducted in a safe and sound manner, and in compliance with all applicable laws. While the effects of the events in the crypto sector on Federal Reserve-supervised banks have been limited in the aggregate thus far, recent experience has made it clear that crypto could pose risks to those banks. In response, we have worked with the other federal bank regulatory agencies to provide clarity and guidance on what is permissible, safe and sound, and compliant with anti-money-laundering and anti-terrorist financing laws as well as consumer and investor protections. And we've set out our supervisory expectations for banks engaging with new product types and activities. As noted above, this is not just a domestic issue. We are also working with our international counterparts to minimize the possibility of regulatory arbitrage across jurisdictions. The Federal Reserve's Approach to Supervising Banks' Engagement with CryptoOne overarching principle of the Federal Reserve's financial oversight is that activities that are fundamentally the same should be regulated the same, regardless of where or how the activity occurs or the terms used to describe the activity. We have a somewhat complicated financial services regulatory framework in the United States, and there are several regulatory authorities with oversight of financial services activities. But we know how important it is for entities interested in providing financial services with new technologies to engage on a level playing field. That is why we have worked closely with the other bank regulatory agencies to develop a consistent approach. Our overall stance is that, at this stage of the development, banks should take a careful and cautious approach to engaging in crypto-asset related activities and the crypto sector. Overview of Recent Federal Reserve ActionsOver decades, federal bank regulators have articulated supervisory expectations for managing, monitoring, and controlling risks to safety and soundness. These expectations are generally principles-based—meaning they can be applied in a broad range of circumstances. Given emerging interest in crypto-asset activities, we have worked to provide clear and transparent guidance. Last August, we published a supervisory guidance letter for banks engaging in or seeking to engage in crypto-related activities.9In the letter, we reminded firms that the first step when considering engaging in crypto-related activities is to establish that the activities are legally permissible, and that there are sufficient controls in place to ensure these activities can be conducted in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with all applicable laws. Against the background of possible crimes that some crypto companies are now under investigation for, this is not a box-checking exercise. Our letter also lets banks know that they are expected to notify the Federal Reserve if they intend to engage in crypto-asset related activities and to engage in a robust supervisory conversation. The letter said, in effect, "Don't jump in and plan to figure out risk management later." It stated that "Federal Reserve-supervised banking organizations should have adequate systems and controls in place to conduct crypto-asset-related activities in a safe and sound manner prior to commencing such activities." In the ensuing months, a lot happened in the crypto world, including the turmoil discussed earlier. On January 3, after learning from these developments, the Board and other bank regulatory agencies issued another statement advising banks to be focused on a list of several key risks.10The list ranges from the risk of fraud and scams of crypto participants to money laundering and terrorist financing, to stablecoin run risks.11 Later in January, the Board issued a policy statement making it clear to the banks we supervise that the Board would apply the same permissibility standards to activities, including crypto-asset-related activities, regardless of a bank's deposit insurance status.12The preamble to the statement made clear that we would likely view it as unsafe and unsound for banks to directly own crypto-assets on their balance sheets. In addition, we clarified that the banks we supervise seeking to issue stablecoins or dollar tokens would have to show that they have controls in place to do so in a safe and sound manner and that they would need to obtain a non-objection notice from Federal Reserve supervisors before proceeding. On February 23, we provided additional clarity about supervisory expectations through another statement issued jointly with other bank regulatory agencies.13This statement was also informed by recent supervisory experience. The statement highlighted to our supervised institutions that they need to be aware of the liquidity risks associated with certain crypto sector-affiliated deposits. We always expect banks to assess and manage the liquidity risks of their funding sources. As the statement makes clear—and as has been obvious throughout the last few months—crypto sector depositors may have assets that can be affected by volatility in the sector. This volatility can lead to unpredictable, rapid, and correlated deposit inflows and withdrawals, and thus the liquidity risks of their deposits, of course, require some additional attention. These liquidity concerns are particularly acute for banks that have a meaningful portion of their balance sheets funded with such deposits. Again, we took these steps to make clear that we have the same expectations for all the institutions that we supervise and which seek to engage in novel activities. These expectations are not new. We expect supervised entities to ensure that they conduct their activities in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with all relevant laws, including anti-money-laundering laws. These public statements are transparent and provide the same information for everyone, including for small banks that may not have large teams of analysts assessing industry developments, large banks with more resources, and, of course, the public. We plan to continue to publish guidance of this kind as we continue to examine activity in the sector. In addition to sharing what we learn with the public on an ongoing basis, we are also enhancing our supervision of these activities. We are creating a specialized team of experts that can help us learn from new developments and make sure we're up to date on innovation in this sector. Special Risks Associated with StablecoinsI want to wrap up today by talking about stablecoins. As Chair Powell has said, stablecoins are a type of private money, and there is a long and messy history of private money in the United States that shows the need for robust regulation and oversight.14Any entity issuing money denominated in the U.S. dollar and drawing on the trust of the Federal Reserve needs to be subject to federal prudential regulation and supervision. I am not saying anything new here. This has been our consistent approach. Stablecoin issuers seek to have—but don't—some of the same characteristics as federally insured bank deposits. Stablecoin issuers represent that their liabilities can be redeemed on demand at par, a dollar for a dollar. In fact, however, the assets backing the liability can fluctuate in value. Even if the assets backing the claim are high quality, they cannot necessarily be immediately monetized, and operational risks are quite high. As we have seen all too often, depositors sometimes want or need their money immediately, especially in times of stress. This mismatch in value and liquidity is the recipe for a classic bank run. Issuers are not supervised by the Fed and lack capital and liquidity as a backstop. The banks we regulate, in contrast, are well protected from bank runs through a robust array of supervisory requirements. Consider the consequences if a stablecoin not subject to appropriate supervision and regulation were to be adopted as a widespread means of payment, which some stablecoin developers state as a goal. Stablecoins have the potential to scale quickly because of network effects. An unregulated, unsupervised, deposit-like asset could create tremendous disruptions, not just for financial institutions but for people who might rely on the coin if it were to get wide adoption. We must learn from the past to ensure that we do not allow for new forms of unregulated private money subject to classic forms of run risk, and with the associated spillovers and systemic implications for households, businesses, and the broader economy. ConclusionThat gets me back to the central point of my remarks, which is the need to balance innovation with safeguards. Our goal is to create guardrails, while making room for innovation that can benefit consumers and the financial system more broadly. We are working with the other bank regulatory agencies to consider whether and how certain crypto-asset activity can be conducted in a manner that is consistent with safe and sound banking. We are also working toward providing additional clarity on our views of risks and effective risk management practices across a range of crypto-related activity. We will continue to be transparent with the banking sector and the public about our expectations. We will also work with the other agencies to align our approach to ensure that the same risks receive the same treatment. As we continue our efforts, we will work to support innovation by establishing the guardrails essential for sustainable, safe, and transparent markets. Thank you. 1. The views here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. "One in Five Adults Has Invested In, Traded or Used Cryptocurrency, NBC News Poll Shows," CNBC, last modified March 31, 2022, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/03/31/cryptocurrency-news-21percent-of-adults-have-traded-or-used-crypto-nbc-poll-shows.html.Return to text 3. Michael S. Barr, "Innovation & Regulation: Some Preliminary Observations" November, 2017, https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/9789813223400_0017.Return to text 4. It should be noted that a substantial number of investors and other members of the public believe there are little to no benefits from crypto. See "Letter in Support of Responsible Fintech Policy," June 1, 2022, https://concerned.tech/.Return to text 5. Robert J. Shiller,Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major Economic Events(New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2019).Return to text 6. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, "Charges Samuel Bankman-Fried with Defrauding Investors in Crypto Asset Trading Platform FTX," news release, December 13, 2022. See also U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, "Defendant Concealed His Diversion of FTX Customers' Funds to Crypto Trading Firm Alameda Research While Raising More Than $1.8 Billion from Investors," news release, January 19, 2023.Return to text 7. For example, Celsius Network LLC; Voyager Digital Holdings; BlockFi Inc.; FTX Trading Ltd.; Three Arrows Capital, Ltd.; and Genesis Global Holdco LLC.Return to text 8. See, e.g., U.S. Department of the Treasury,National Money Laundering Risk Assessment(PDF)(Washington: Department of the Treasury, February 2022), 40-45. See also Department of the Treasury,National Terrorism Financing Risk Assessment(PDF)(Washington: Department of the Treasury, February 2022), 21-23.Return to text 9. SR 22-6 / CA 22-6, "Engagement in Crypto-Asset-Related Activities by Federal Reserve-Supervised Banking Organizations."Return to text 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Joint Statement on Crypto-Asset Risks to Banking Organizations," news release, January 3, 2023.Return to text 11. The eight specific risks highlighted are as follows: (1) the risk of fraud or scams among crypto participants; (2) legal uncertainty about custody practices, redemptions, and ownership rights; (3) crypto companies claiming they carry deposit insurance; (4) volatility in crypto asset values; (5) run risk from stablecoins; (6) the risk of contagion from interconnected crypto participants; (7) practices that may be unfair, deceptive, or abusive, contributing to significant harm to retail and institutional investors, customers, and counterparties; and (8) risk management that lacks "maturing and robustness."Return to text 12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Issues Policy Statement to Promote a Level Playing Field for All Banks with a Federal Supervisor, Regardless of Deposit Insurance Status," news release, January 27, 2023.Return to text 13. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies Issue Joint Statement on Liquidity Risks to Banking Organizations Resulting from Crypto-Asset Market Vulnerabilities," news release, February 23, 2023.Return to text 14. Kyle Campbell, "Powell: Stablecoin Regulation Belongs to the Fed,"American Banker, September 27, 2022, https://www.americanbanker.com/news/powell-stablecoin-regulation-belongs-to-the-fed.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Independent Community Bankers of America ICBA Live 2023 Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii I would like to thank the ICBA for the invitation to speak with you today. It is a pleasure to be with you to discuss innovation in the U.S. financial system, the emerging trends that are shaping the industry, and the influence of regulatory approach on this evolution.1 Before turning to the main theme of my remarks, I would like to take a moment to acknowledge the events of the past week, and the actions taken by regulators in response. As you are aware, last Friday, March 10, the California Department of Financial Protection and Innovation closed Silicon Valley Bank. On March 12, the New York Department of Financial Services closed Signature Bank. In both cases, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has been appointed as receiver. One significant factor leading to the stress and subsequent closure at each institution was the rapid outflow of deposits, specifically uninsured deposits above the FDIC-guaranteed amount of $250,000 per depositor, per account type. On Sunday, several specific actions were announced that are intended to limit the direct and indirect risks to the U.S. financial system resulting from the closure of these two financial institutions. The Federal Reserve Board announced that it will make additional funding available to eligible depository institutions through a newly created Bank Term Funding Program.2This program will offer one year loans to institutions that pledge U.S. Treasury securities, agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, and other qualifying assets as collateral. The facility will provide an additional source of liquidity to banks and eliminate the need for institutions to quickly sell these securities during a time of stress. The FDIC also took action to protect all depositors, including uninsured depositors, of both Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. Beginning Monday morning, these depositors were able to access all of their funds on deposit with these banks. The federal regulators, including the FDIC, the Federal Reserve Board and U.S. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen approved the actions to protect depositors. The U.S. banking system remains resilient and on a solid foundation, with strong capital and liquidity throughout the system. The Board continues to carefully monitor developments in financial markets and across the financial system. Now, turning to the main theme of my remarks today, I will discuss the imperative of fostering innovation in the banking system. Often, when innovation is discussed within the context of the banking system, the focus is not on traditional banks engaged in core banking activities, like taking retail deposits and making loans. I think this perception misses the mark. Innovation has always been a priority for banks of all sizes and business models, from small community banks to the largest global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), and for good reason. Banks in the U.S. have a long history of developing and implementing new technologies. Innovation has the potential to make the banking and payments systems faster and more efficient, to bring new products and services to customers, and even to enhance safety and soundness. Yet, some have criticized the banking regulators for being hostile to innovation, at least when that innovation occurs within the regulated financial system. Regulators are continually learning about and adapting to new technologies, just as banks are, and regulators can play an important, complementary role, making the regulatory rules of the road clear and transparent to foster bank innovation. Innovation does pose challenges within the regulated banking system, which can be amplified for community banks. Along with presenting new opportunities, innovation can introduce new risks and create new vulnerabilities. Banks, and really, any business today that adopts new technologies must be prepared to make corresponding improvements to manage these risks and vulnerabilities, including improvements to risk management, cybersecurity, and consumer compliance. Regulators must continue to promote efforts that are consistent with safe and sound banking practices and in compliance with applicable laws, including consumer protection laws. As I am sure you appreciate, this is not always an easy task, and the regulatory response to innovation must reflect the changes in how banks engage in this process. It is absolutely critical that innovation not distract banks and regulators from the traditional risks that are omnipresent in the business of banking, particularly credit, liquidity, concentration, and interest rate risk.3These more traditional risks are present in all bank business models but can be especially acute for banks engaging in novel activities or exposed to new markets, including crypto-assets.4Whatever the cause, many traditional risks can be mitigated with appropriate risk-management and liquidity planning practices, and effective supervision, and without stifling the ability of banks to innovate. Today, I will address three issues related to innovation. First, I will briefly discuss how bank regulation and supervision can best support responsible innovation. Second, I will touch on the unique challenges that apply to smaller and community banks pursuing innovation. Finally, I will mention a few key actions that the federal banking regulators have taken to date, and how I think about future regulatory and supervisory actions to support innovation. And before I conclude, I will also quickly touch on a few other issues that may be of interest to you. Supporting Responsible InnovationIn the past, I have spoken about the principles that I believe should guide bank regulation and supervision.5I have noted the value of independence—tempered by public accountability—in the Fed's role as a bank supervisor. I have also stressed the need for clear rules of engagement and predictability in the bank applications process. And I have emphasized that transparency of expectations in rules and guidance are critical to a bank regulatory system that is fair and efficient. I think these principles are instructive when it comes to how regulators should address innovation. As both consumer needs and their preferences in accessing financial services change, so too must the banking industry. Banks of all sizes see new opportunities to develop enhanced and customized products for their customers, introduce faster payments, and improve efficiency. If our goal is a banking system that leverages the many benefits of innovation, regulators need to make deliberate choices about how we regulate and supervise. Further, we need to be aware of and sensitive to the unintended consequences of our regulatory framework. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have an important role to play in helping ensure banks can innovate in a safe and sound manner, and that role includes transparency in expectations. And of course, we must ensure that regulation and supervision do not place unnecessary burdens on small banks. The vast majority of banks want to meet regulatory expectations. By publishing clear guidance and developing tools to help assist these banks, regulators can improve regulatory transparency and facilitate compliance. Transparency is a tool that can serve the supervisory goal of promoting a safe, sound, and fair banking system, particularly when it comes to innovation. In exercising supervisory and regulatory authority, the federal banking agencies must be aware of not only the risks to the U.S. financial system, but also the harm that can be caused to U.S. consumers and businesses when we don't achieve sufficient clarity and transparency in our expectations and when our regulations are disproportionately burdensome to the risks they are intended to address. With innovation, the risk is that a regulatory approach based on subjective, ad hoc judgments—as opposed to clear guidance and regulatory expectations—could cause new products and services to migrate to the shadow banking system. We have already seen a similar phenomenon in some markets, as with nonbank lending, which has proportionately increased when compared to bank lending in recent years. A lack of transparency, and the corresponding limits on bank innovation, has adverse consequences for consumers, businesses, and communities. Therefore, it should be a regulatory priority to ensure our approach continues to support innovation that is conducted in a safe and sound manner and is consistent with applicable laws, including consumer protection. The Innovation Challenges for Community BanksI think everyone here today recognizes the valuable role that small banks play in the U.S. financial system, and just as important, in the communities they serve.6Small banks provide credit and financial services to businesses and individuals through personalized services and relationship banking. Small banks have a deep commitment to their communities and understand their unique customers, including how they may weather the ups and downs of economic cycles. If we look at the financial health of small banks today, we see an industry that is well-positioned to support economic growth. Across a broad range of metrics, including capital, liquidity, earnings, credit quality, and loan growth, small banks have been performing well. But small banks also face unique challenges, especially when it comes to innovation. Small banks tend to have fewer resources to devote to these activities and fewer staff members with the technological expertise to develop products in-house. Therefore, small banks tend to be more reliant on third-party relationships to support innovation, including the critical relationship between small banks and their core service providers. However, third-party relationships can also increase operational risk, data security and cybersecurity vulnerabilities, and create other compliance issues. And of course, a bank's use of third parties does not diminish its responsibility with respect to the activities conducted by the third-party service provider. I think the principles I mentioned earlier can be particularly relevant when thinking about how regulators can support small bank innovation. Transparency in expectations is important for the smallest banks, who may view innovation as a strategic priority, but may lack the resources of larger peers to engage in innovation and third-party partnerships or cover costs of legal advice to address ambiguous regulatory expectations. One way we can adopt a tailored approach is by providing additional resources and tools for smaller institutions to assist with compliance. Regulators have already successfully developed compliance tools. These include the Board's recently developed tools to assist community banks estimate their losses under the Current Expected Credit Loss, or CECL, accounting standard. The federal banking agencies also published a guide for community banks on conducting due diligence for financial technology companies.7 I think these types of efforts are very important as we introduce new regulations and requirements. Clear guidance and practical implementation tools can reduce the burden of regulation while also promoting compliance. The Evolving Regulatory Response to InnovationInnovation allows banks to become more efficient and better meet customer demands. So, while bank regulators do not want to hinder innovation, we also have a responsibility to ensure that the banking industry adopts new technologies appropriately. To help balance these two goals, it is incumbent upon regulators to prioritize clear guidance to banks. Having clear (and public) regulatory expectations not only supports public accountability, but also gives banks greater flexibility to innovate and experiment with new technologies. Across a range of activities, both banks and regulators are working to make innovation accessible to all banks, with clear guidance and additional tools and resources to help small banks. I'll now turn to a few specific examples where regulators have been working to develop transparency and clear expectations. Crypto-asset activitiesMany bank customers have expressed interest in crypto-assets over the past several years, with some banks exploring how they can meet this customer demand. There are a multitude of design and use cases for new and innovative technologies, such as distributed ledger technology and crypto-assets, which can pose unique challenges for regulators. The variability of these activities complicates the development of clear regulatory expectations around safety and soundness and risk management, and raises questions about legal permissibility. The lack of clear and timely regulatory guidance creates a real challenge for banks interested in exploring these activities. Crypto-asset activities remain an important focus for the Federal Reserve and other bank regulators. While some banks continue to explore offering crypto-asset-related products and services to their customers, the extreme volatility of these assets creates significant challenges for banks. These assets also vary widely in terms of their structure, the markets for trading, and whether they are backed by any assets. Until clear statutory and regulatory parameters exist to govern these types of assets and the exchanges on which they are traded, I think some of the uncertainties about how the banking system can engage in crypto activities will remain unsettled. While there is more to do, there have been some helpful initial steps to provide clarity on regulatory expectations. First, the Board published guidance clarifying that all state member banks should notify their lead supervisory point of contact prior to engaging in crypto-asset-related activities.8The letter also clarified the broad requirements of a firm's obligations, including the need to analyze the legal permissibility of the activities, and to develop adequate systems, risk management, and controls to conduct these activities in a safe and sound manner and consistent with all applicable laws. More recently, the bank regulators published additional guidance to highlight the risks of crypto-asset-related activities. In January, the federal agencies released a statement highlighting crypto-asset risks and recently issued a statement on liquidity risks resulting from crypto-asset market vulnerabilities.9Federal Reserve staff continues to develop guidance on crypto-asset activities, including on custody, trade facilitation, loans collateralized by crypto-assets, and the issuance and distribution of stablecoins. I think these are critical next steps to provide clarity around regulatory expectations. Third-party risk managementThird-party relationships can provide smaller banks access to new products, services, and technology. The scope of these partnerships can be quite broad, including fintech companies, partners who use the bank's "Banking as a Service" products, cloud service providers, and many others. But third-party partnerships designed to bring innovation into a bank can also create risk-management and due diligence challenges, particularly with respect to identifying the risks that a third-party partner may pose and to managing these risks. For small banks, these compliance problems can be amplified by a number of factors. Small banks may have limited experience and in-house expertise conducting due diligence on third-party partners like fintech companies. And small banks likely have limited leverage in negotiating contracts and informational rights with third-party partners. Small banks may also encounter friction with nonbank partners who fail to understand the bank's ongoing responsibilities to ensure that even outsourced activities are conducted in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with consumer protection laws. The Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies can play an important role in helping banks continue to innovate through third-party partnerships. Specifically, the agencies have been working to develop joint guidance to clarify regulatory expectations around third-party risk management, which will be an important step in supporting innovation built on third-party partnerships. This guidance could be particularly helpful for small banks. But clearer guidance and regulatory expectations will not fully address these challenges. Guidance alone cannot address the challenges that a small bank faces in conducting due diligence on third parties and the difficulty in negotiating a contract with larger nonbank service providers and partners. ICBA has taken some important first steps in determining if there are opportunities to fill these knowledge gaps by leveraging collective action to help with due diligence. In addition, some interesting preliminary work has been done to consider whether a standards-setting organization, in the form of a public–private partnership, could expedite due diligence on third-party fintech partners. A centralized, standards-setting organization could help develop minimum standards to ensure better consistency in the diligence banks apply to these partnerships. I see a great deal of promise in these efforts, and I support continued work to develop these mechanisms to help small banks innovate through third-party partnerships. Another area in need of attention is in assisting small banks achieve similar treatment in their contracts in comparison to larger nonbank service providers and partners. All banks should understand regulatory expectations with respect to due diligence, risk management, and ongoing compliance when engaging in third-party relationships. Banking regulators can support this approach by providing clear expectations and the tools smaller banks may need to help them meet these expectations. For example, in 2021 the Federal Reserve began providing state member banks with supervisory reports on their third-party partners that are subject to supervision under the Bank Service Company Act. These reports contain information that may provide helpful insight in assessing the performance of bank service providers, depending on the services used and the risk the services pose. As we are considering additional opportunities to provide resources in this space, your feedback and experience would be helpful to understand where we should focus our future efforts. Bank service company oversightAnother area that complements third-party risk management is the agencies' regulatory authority over bank service companies. While banks who engage in partnerships with third parties continue to bear responsibility for due diligence and compliance, we should also consider whether the bank itself, or the third-party service provider, is best positioned to address risks. The regulatory burden of third-party relationships falls heavily on banks (particularly small banks), and sometimes bleeds over to their core service providers, because the core service providers often make the technical changes to core systems to enable integration with innovative new products and services. Core service providers are already subject to activities-based supervision under the Bank Service Company Act. But with the expansion of third-party relationships, it is worth considering whether this allocation of responsibility remains sound, or whether additional parties—like fintechs and other technology companies—should be subject to closer scrutiny for the products and services they provide to banks. If third parties provide products and services to bank customers, it also may be appropriate for these providers to bear greater responsibility for their own products and services, including to ensure that they are provided in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with financial and consumer laws and regulations. CybersecurityWe do not often talk about cybersecurity in the context of innovation, but improving cybersecurity can complement innovation. When a bank is planning to develop new technology or pursue innovation, those new activities often bring new risks. As you know, bankers often refer to cybersecurity as one of the top risks facing the banking industry, and the Federal Reserve has issued guidance and examination procedures on a range of cybersecurity issues to help banks prepare for cyber events when they occur. Cyber threats constantly evolve, and banks' cybersecurity efforts must be dynamic in response. Banks must respond to emerging threats by adapting risk-management practices, engaging with regulators and law enforcement when an attack occurs, and participating in training and exercises to ensure cyber preparedness. As I have noted in the past, the Federal Reserve continues to work closely with banks to support these efforts.10 Other Important TrendsAlthough I won't be able to take questions today, I would like to address a few other issues that may be of interest to this group related to bank regulation and supervision. Community Reinvestment Act reform. As you all know, last May, the federal banking agencies issued a notice of proposed rulemaking that would amend the Community Reinvestment Act. The agencies received extensive comments on the proposal, including comments describing the costs and benefits of the proposal and how it would impact banks. Chair Powell noted last week that there is essentially agreement among the three agencies. While we are hard at work, it is expected that it will take some months to complete. I am continuing to review and understand this proposal and the costs it will impose. From my perspective, it will be important to consider how the costs imposed by any final rule compare to the benefits of the rule, not just in the aggregate, but for institutions of different sizes and engaged in different banking activities. Climate risk management and regulation.Climate risk-management and regulation efforts include the recent launch of a climate scenario exercise for the largest firms and a climate guidance proposal for a broader range of large firms. The Federal Reserve's role in this space is very limited and generally is confined to ensuring banks operate in a safe and sound manner, relying on appropriate risk management. With respect to climate change risks, it is important to think carefully about the costs and benefits of any guidance and the scope such guidance may include. As proposed, the climate risk-management guidance would apply only to the largest firms. Of course, all banks below this threshold, including small banks, would remain subject to robust risk-management expectations, which includes managing all material risks. In many instances, these expectations may require banks to manage a range of related risks, especially from extreme weather and natural disasters. Capital.As you know, the banking agencies are currently engaged in a holistic bank capital standards review and are working to implement the Basel III "endgame" reforms. With respect to the Basel III capital reforms, the agencies recently reaffirmed their commitment to implement these standards to strengthen the resilience of the U.S. financial system. As I think you all know, there are no plans to propose changes to the community bank capital framework as part of this capital review. It remains to be seen how broad the proposal will be, and for the larger firms, which firms will be affected. Bank merger policy. There are significant consequences for firms when applications are not acted on in a timely manner, including increased operational risk, the additional expense associated with running two institutions in parallel over a longer period, employee retention issues, and perceived reputational risk. In my mind, this is an area that we need to improve; delays in the processing of applications are not exclusively an issue for large banks. Small banks are also subject to timing issues when engaged in bank merger transactions. In fact, small banks that operate in more rural areas with few competitors who try to merge with other local banks can raise competitive concerns under the Federal Reserve's traditional merger standards. As I've previously noted, one way to improve the timing of small bank merger transactions is by considering all competitors when evaluating the competitive effects of mergers.11In many rural markets, credit unions, farm credit system institutions, banks without a branch presence, and nonbank lenders can all be significant competitors in different product markets. In some cases, these smaller banks face greater issues in pursuing merger transactions than larger banks that operate in dense urban centers with many bank competitors. For all banks engaged in merger transactions, delays should be the exception, not the rule. Efforts to support minority depository institutions. Minority depository institutions, or MDIs, play an important role in our financial system. MDIs often provide credit and financial services to low and moderate income and minority communities. The Federal Reserve is committed to preserving minority ownership of depository institutions, and providing technical assistance to MDIs, through the Fed's Partnership for Progress program. Federal Reserve staff frequently meets with MDI management teams to discuss emerging issues, provide technical assistance, explain supervisory guidance, and respond to management concerns. This engagement not only furthers our efforts to support these banks, but also provides valuable insight and feedback on the challenges facing MDIs. It is also an opportunity to gather feedback on regulatory proposals. Overdraft fees.Banks often provide limited overdraft protection to customers and historically have charged a fee for this service. Recently, as you know, this practice has come under some regulatory scrutiny. For example, many banks have taken a close look at their practices to ensure that they are subject to appropriate disclosures and are operated in a way that is fair to consumers. The Federal Reserve's approach in evaluating overdraft practices has been to prioritize compliance through the review of these practices, ongoing engagement with bank management, and most importantly, transparency in our regulatory expectations. Regulatory expectations should never come as a surprise to regulated institutions, and our examiners find that transparency is an effective tool to promote compliance. I would like to address one specific overdraft practice that has been the focus of recent attention—authorize positive, settle negative (or APSN) transactions. These transactions occur when a bank authorizes a consumer's point-of-sale transaction based on sufficient funds in the consumer's account, but at the time the transaction posts, the consumer's account has insufficient funds. In some cases, the institution imposes an overdraft fee on the consumer when this occurs. Over the past decade, the Federal Reserve has focused on this issue as part of our supervisory activities. For example, in July 2018, we published an article in theConsumer Compliance Supervision Bulletinthat explained our concerns that charging consumers overdraft fees based on APSN can constitute an unfair practice.12 At the same time, we recognize that some of this risk is driven by system limitations of the core service providers, which can pose a real challenge to community banks confronting this issue in their own transaction processing operations. In some cases, core service providers need to implement changes to their systems to allow banks to avoid charging these fees. While this issue is a narrow one in the context of broader discussions about overdraft fees, it is important. We encourage banks to continue working with their service providers to implement fixes to system-based issues, and we encourage service providers to support their bank clients in providing compliant products. ConclusionInnovation has long been a high priority for banks, and I expect it will continue to be a key issue for the future. New technologies have created significant opportunities for banks to become more efficient and competitive and to provide improved products and services for customers. While innovation brings new opportunities, it also introduces additional risks. But a transparent regulatory posture for these activities can help banks of all sizes embrace new technologies, to the benefit of their customers and the broader economy. The specific innovations I mentioned today only scratch the surface of the technologies and innovations that banks are exploring, which also include the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning; efforts to develop faster payments, clearing, and settlement technologies; and many others. For all areas of innovation that banks are interested in pursuing, regulators should continue to prioritize timely, clear, and transparent guidance. I would like to again thank the ICBA for the invitation to speak to you today, and also to recognize the incredible commitment and efforts of the bankers in this room and beyond in support of their communities and the ongoing strength of the U.S. economy. 1. The views expressed in these remarks are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Announces It Will Make Available Additional Funding to Eligible Depository Institutions to Help Assure Banks Have the Ability to Meet the Needs of All Their Depositors," news release, March 12, 2023.Return to text 3. As part of our ongoing outreach and dialogue to community banks, I along with colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conducted an "Ask the Fed" session this past December, discussing unrealized losses at community banks in a rising rate environment. Ask the Fed, a Program of the Federal Reserve System, "A Discussion of Unrealized Losses at Community Banks in a Rising Interest Rate Environment" (December 16, 2022).Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Joint Statement on Liquidity Risks to Banking Organizations Resulting from Crypto-Asset Market Vulnerabilities (PDF)," news release, February 23, 2023.Return to text 5. See Michelle Bowman, "Welcoming Remarks" (speech at the Midwest Cyber Workshop, organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis, February 15, 2023); "Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision" (speech at the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, February 13, 2023); "Brief Remarks on the Economy and Bank Supervision" (speech at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, January 10, 2023); "Large Bank Supervision and Regulation" (speech at the Institute of International Finance Event: In Conversation with Michelle Bowman, September 30, 2022); "Technology, Innovation, and Financial Services" (speech at the VenCent Fintech Conference, August 17, 2022); "My Perspective on Bank Regulation and Supervision" (speech at the Conference for Community Bankers sponsored by the American Bankers Association, February 16, 2021).Return to text 6. For purposes of these remarks, I will refer to regional banking organizations and community banking organizations as "small banks."Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "Conducting Due Diligence on Financial Technology Companies: A Guide for Community Banks (PDF)" (Washington: Board of Governors, FDIC, OCC, August 2021).Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "SR 22-6 Letter / CA 22-6 Letter: Engagement in Crypto-Asset-Related Activities by Federal Reserve-Supervised Banking Organizations," August 16, 2022.Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, and OCC, "Joint Statement on Crypto-Asset Risks to Banking Organizations (PDF)" (Washington: Board of Governors, FDIC, OCC, January 3, 2023); "Joint Statement on Liquidity Risks to Banking Organizations Resulting from Crypto-Asset Market Vulnerabilities (PDF)," February 23, 2023.Return to text 10. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Welcoming Remarks" (speech at the Midwest Cyber Workshop, organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis, February 15, 2023).Return to text 11. See Michelle W. Bowman, "The New Landscape for Banking Competition" (speech at the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri, September 28, 2022).Return to text 12. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Consumer Compliance Supervision Bulletin (PDF), (July 2018).Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2023 Midwest Economics Association 87th Annual Meeting, Cleveland, Ohio Thanks to President Kasey Buckles and the program committee for affording me the opportunity to give the C. Woody Thompson Memorial Lecture. It is a pleasure to be back in the Midwest. Before joining the Federal Reserve, I taught economics at Michigan State University, which I chose for its bird's-eye view of the industrial Midwest. Big 10 rivalries aside, Ohio and Michigan share quite a lot, including many of the same economic concerns and interests. Today I would like to outline my views on the trajectory of U.S. economic developments and what they imply for the appropriate path of monetary policy.1 This is an especially challenging time to be an economic analyst or policymaker. Recent developments in the banking sector have added to existing uncertainties about recovery from the pandemic shock and developments abroad. In that context, the economic and policy outlook needs to balance data dependence with forward-looking analysis. Recent data show greater momentum in inflation and economic activity, but recent banking developments may suggest greater headwinds for financial conditions and the economy going forward. The U.S. economyAssessing the current state of the economy requires revisiting the pandemic and its economic repercussions. From the perspective of the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee, the 2020 recession was unprecedented. Of the 35 recessions since 1858, only 8 spanned months in the single digits from peak to trough. The one in 2020 was severe, but it spanned only two months from peak to trough and was the shortest recession on record. However, the pandemic's economic effects reverberated through 2021 and 2022. Inflation surged during the recovery amid pandemic-induced disruptions to supply, while demand for goods was boosted by a shift away from in-person services, and overall demand was supported by monetary and fiscal policy. Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 was a further supply shock to the global economy, driving up prices for energy and other commodities. Last June, U.S. inflation hit a peak of 7 percent as measured by the 12-month change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) index. In response, the Federal Reserve has been using its monetary policy tools to restore price stability by bringing demand into line with still-constrained supply. Over the past year, we have raised the federal funds rate nearly 5 percentage points and have begun to reduce the size of our balance sheet. As a result, financial conditions have tightened significantly. Borrowing costs have risen, equity prices have declined, and the dollar has appreciated on net. Interest-sensitive sectors of the economy have slowed. Residential investment subtracted nearly 1 percentage point from gross domestic product growth last year, as housing demand was curtailed by higher mortgage rates. Business fixed investment held up last year but appears to have slowed more recently. Manufacturing activity has slowed in response to tighter financing conditions, the stronger dollar, and some retracement of the pandemic-related shift from services to goods. As energy prices have moderated and supply disruptions have eased, inflation has started to abate. However, the process of returning inflation to 2 percent has a long way to go and is likely to be uneven and bumpy. Indeed, the inflation picture is less favorable than it appeared earlier this year. Part of the encouraging disinflation initially observed in the fourth quarter of last year was revised away, while inflation over the first two months of this year came in high. The inflation data show some persistence. The 3-, 6-, and 12-month changes in February prices for the core PCE index—excluding food and energy—are all around 4-1/2 to 5 percent. Housing services inflation continues at a rapid monthly clip, contributing much more to inflation than it did before the pandemic. Inflation in non-housing core services remains sticky at elevated levels. Even core goods prices rose in January and February, after three months of declines, highlighting the uneven nature of the disinflationary process. Even so, several factors are likely to contribute to disinflation. Long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored, and shorter-term expectations have retraced much of last year's rise.2Rent increases on new leases have slowed sharply over the past six months, which should begin to pull down measured housing-services inflation over the course of this year. Moreover, significant supply of multifamily housing is coming online, which should take further pressure off the rental market. Core goods inflation should continue converging toward its pre-pandemic trend of slightly negative numbers, as supply chains continue to heal and demand for goods continues to slow. Rebounding automobile production should help prices for new and used cars continue to moderate as cars become more available. More broadly in the economy, profit margins may narrow as buyers become more price sensitive and pull back on spending. Earnings calls from nonfinancial corporations already show increasing awareness of resistance to price increases. Non-housing core services inflation is a broad category that accounts for more than half of the core PCE index. Inflation in that category looks quite persistent amid strong post-pandemic demand for travel, dining out, and medical care. Disinflation in these services will likely require some combination of slowing demand and further recovery in supply. One potential avenue of disinflation is that a decline in prices for some goods may help lower related services prices. For instance, an eventual retreat in car prices may feed into lower prices for car insurance, repairs, and rentals, reversing some of their increases over the past two years. Another potential source of disinflation is that wage growth has moderated somewhat, even as the labor market remains very strong by most measures. Payroll employment growth was extraordinarily robust in January and February, unemployment remains near record lows, and job openings remain very elevated. Nonetheless, there are some signs that the labor market is softening at the margin. The Federal Reserve Board staff's measure of private employment using data from the payroll processing firm ADP suggests that job gains slowed in January and February. Job postings from Indeed show a noticeable decline. And the quits rate has retraced more than half of its pandemic-era rise, falling steadily from a 3 percent peak in late 2021 to 2.5 percent in January. That could be significant, as much of the surge in wage growth a year ago may have been driven by outsized wage gains of those changing jobs and by employers raising wages to retain existing workers. This wage moderation may partly reflect some improvement in labor supply. Labor force participation edged up to 62.5 percent in the most recent data. Prime-age participation is now back to pre-pandemic levels. In addition, new estimates show higher population growth over the past year amid a rebound in immigration. Over time, there is reason to believe that rising productivity also may aid supply. I see three potential sources of rising productivity growth. First, increased innovation associated with the spurt of new businesses since the onset of the pandemic may raise productivity. Second, current labor shortages are spurring increased investment in automation that should boost labor productivity over time. Finally, a recent paper by David Autor, Arin Dube, and Annie McGrew suggests another way that the strong labor market could boost productivity.3They find that faster wage gains for lower-paid workers have come from job-switching to higher-wage firms, which may also be more-productive firms. Currently, however, supply in the economy continues to be insufficient to meet still-robust demand. Importantly, consumer spending has gained steam this year after slowing late last year. Consumer spending is being supported by robust growth in households' real disposable income amid strong employment growth. Strong household balance sheets have also supported spending, although lower-income consumers appear to have mostly exhausted their excess savings. Altogether, the incoming data would suggest a somewhat higher inflation rate for this year and stronger economic growth. However, I am closely watching developments in the banking sector, which have the potential to tighten credit conditions and counteract some of that momentum. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. The Federal Reserve, working with other agencies, has taken decisive actions to protect the U.S. economy and to strengthen public confidence in our banking system. We will continue to closely monitor conditions in the banking system and are prepared to use all our tools, as needed, to keep the system safe and sound. At the same time, I am monitoring overall financial conditions in the U.S. economy, including indicators of credit availability. I am well aware of the extensive literature linking monetary policy, credit conditions, economic activity, and inflation. Over the past 15 years, that literature came to be roughly a quarter of the syllabus in the macroeconomics class that I taught. A particular focus over my career, including in my December NBER paper with Matt Marx and Emmanuel Yimfor, is the importance of smaller financial institutions in lending to small and medium-sized firms.4Those smaller banks over time have developed relevant expertise in small-business lending and have worked to maintain relationships with small firms. Thus, I am attentive to whether recent banking developments will restrain credit to small businesses, which could slow innovation and growth in potential output over time. Data dependence and monetary policyTurning to monetary policy, I have said frequently that my approach to policymaking in uncertain times is to be data dependent. And, like everyone, my own research and experiences shape my views on setting that policy. I was at the Council of Economic Advisers during the euro-area crisis, and my work on emerging economies—particularly Russia and some African economies—has taught me how difficult it can be to forecast in highly uncertain environments. Taking all these lessons into account, I approach all our monetary policy discussions with the same mindset: Of course, it is tempting to follow the old adage of "never make predictions, especially about the future." But ultimately, policymaking must be forward-looking, which means relying, at least in part, on forecasts. The challenge is to figure out which models apply. For example, when I began studying banks in the post-Soviet era for my dissertation, I found that the standard models used in normal times and for mature, industrialized economies are less useful in highly uncertain environments. Since my first FOMC meeting last June, my data-dependent, risk-management approach has led me to support the Fed's response of frontloading monetary policy tightening to bring inflation under control. After the swift policy response of the past year, monetary policy is now in restrictive territory. For instance, real interest rates are positive across the yield curve.5 Going forward, I am weighing the implications of stronger momentum in the economy against potential headwinds from recent developments. On the one hand, if tighter financing conditions restrain the economy, the appropriate path of the federal funds rate may be lower than it would be in their absence. On the other hand, if data show continued strength in the economy and slower disinflation, we may have more work to do. The FOMC has been raising rates in smaller increments as we seek a sufficiently restrictive monetary policy stance to return inflation to 2 percent over time. By taking smaller steps, we can observe economic and financial conditions and consider the cumulative effects of our policy actions. For the econometricians, this approach is similar to the iterative procedure in maximum likelihood estimation, where large early steps are followed by smaller steps as you approach the local optimum. In its March policy statement, the FOMC dialed back its forward guidance on the path of the policy rate.6We shifted from anticipating "ongoing increases" to saying that "some additional policy firming may be appropriate." I think this communication is appropriate as we seek to calibrate monetary policy to be sufficiently restrictive amid uncertainty about the economic outlook. Yet what should not be uncertain is our commitment to our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. We will do what it takes to bring inflation back to our 2 percent target over time, which will lay the foundation for sustainable strength in the labor market and the U.S. economy. 1. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. As shown, for example, in surveys from the University of Michigan and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.Return to text 3. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023),"The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market,"NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).Return to text 4. See Lisa D. Cook, Matt Marx, and Emmanuel Yimfor (2022),"Funding Black High-Growth Startups,"NBER Working Paper Series 30682 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November).Return to text 5. These real interest rates are based on prices from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) and inflation swap markets, as well as survey expectations.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),"Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,"press release, March 22.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy, a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California Thank you, Sylvain, and thank you to the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for inviting me to speak tonight. After listening to many dinner speakers through the years, I am well aware that after the entrees are served, no one wants to hear someone blabber for 45 minutes. So, I will try to keep this short to leave enough time for a robust discussion afterward, which I hope my remarks will generate. My topic tonight is "The Unstable Phillips Curve."1This is not intended to be a deep academic analysis but rather to present some thoughts for discussion. I know that I am walking into the Phillips curve lion's den, given the number of researchers in the Bay Area who work on Phillips curve estimation. But in my current job, I am used to people disagreeing with me. The Phillips curve, a relationship between price or wage inflation and some measure of economic slack, has been the foundation of monetary policy for decades. A common way to estimate it is to look at output price inflation and the unemployment rate. One theory, or story, is that as aggregate demand increases, labor demand will increase as well. As a result, prices of goods and services will rise and firms will hire more workers, as long as there is some stickiness in nominal wages. Consequently, this story implies that the unemployment rate will fall. So, there is a negative relationship between price inflation and unemployment. Another story, based on the New Keynesian model, is that monopolistically competitive firms set prices for some period of time. Firms may have "sticky prices" because of menu costs. That is, firms face costs to adjust their prices and so choose to reset their prices only when the benefits outweigh the costs. Because firms are not identical, only a share of firms adjust their prices each period. So, when aggregate demand increases, firms with set prices agree to supply the goods demanded at their current prices. Firms that find it worthwhile to adjust their prices will increase their prices. As a result, inflation will arise from the firms that adjusted their prices. Meanwhile, higher employment will come from the sticky price firms, and, implicitly, higher employment goes along with lower unemployment. Once again, we obtain a negative relationship between output price inflation and unemployment. The slope of this relationship hinges on the fraction of firms adjusting their prices in response to the aggregate demand shock. Put another way, the frequency of price changes determines the slope of the Phillips curve. In both these stories, expectations of future inflation play a critical role. In the sticky nominal wage story, workers will seek to maintain their real wages by setting their wage demands based on what they think future inflation will be. In the New Keynesian model, firms set their output prices based on what they think aggregate price inflation will be in the future, and how often and at what pace they expect to change prices. Regardless of whether you think nominal wages are sticky or output prices are sticky, inflation expectations play a critical role in how unemployment responds to changes in the inflation rate. This explanation is all about the short run. In either model, in the long run, nominal rigidities, or stickiness, disappear and expectations of inflation converge to trend inflation. As a result, in most models of nominal rigidities the long-run Phillips curve is vertical.2 What do economic data tell us about this relationship? We all know that if you simply plot inflation against the unemployment rate over the past 50 years, you get a blob. There does not appear to be any statistically significant correlation between the two series. In the 1980s and 1990s, so-called freshwater macroeconomists, who tended to work at universities in the middle of the country, argued the data showed that stories about nominal wage or price stickiness were simply wrong and we should quit talking about Phillips curves of any type. Diehard believers in the Phillips curve, the saltwater economists working on the East and West coasts, argued that the data blob was the result of unstable inflation expectations. If inflation expectations were not stable, then the Phillips curve would shift around in such a way that you could not observe the true relationship in the data. What would cause inflation expectations to be unstable? Kydland and Prescott (1977) provided an explanation, later popularized by Barro and Gordon (1983), that blamed the central bank. If the central bank's promises to keep inflation low were not credible, then private agents' inflation expectations would be different than what the central bank promised, which in turn would cause the Phillips curve to shift around. As a result, the idea that the central bank had to make credible promises to keep inflation low became a bedrock principle of central banking that holds to this day. Inflation targeting provided a framework for making promises of low inflation credible, and since the late 1990s it has proved to be very successful in practice. With a central bank strongly committed to inflation targeting, promises to keep inflation at 2 percent are credible in large part because the central bank is observed taking action to keep it near 2 percent, regardless of what is happening to the unemployment rate. When these promises are credible, the Phillips curve should be relatively flat. What have we seen in the recent data? Let's consider a Phillips curve based on the price index for personal consumption expenditures, which is the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) preferred measure. As shown infigure 1, the Phillips curve was very flat for the 20-plus years before the pandemic, consistent with the story that the Federal Reserve was credible at keeping inflation low.3 Then in the spring of 2021, after more than a decade of hibernation, inflation came roaring back to life. As the economy recovered from the pandemic shutdowns, inflation increased each month of the year and was running at more than double the Fed's 2 percent target throughout the latter half of 2021. Meanwhile, unemployment fell quite rapidly in 2021, from 6.3 percent at the start of the year to 3.9 percent in December, which was surprising given the long, slow recoveries after recent recessions. Based on the flatness of the Phillips curve in recent decades, some commentators argued that unemployment would have to rise dramatically to bring inflation back down to 2 percent. Others argued that, based on analysis of the Beveridge curve, inflation could be brought down without a significant rise in unemployment, although this conjecture was not without controversy.4 But considering the data for 2021, as shown infigure 2, the Phillips curve suddenly looked relatively steep. That is, the labor market became extremely tight as the U.S. economy emerged from pandemic lockdowns.Figure 3shows that since January 2022, the Phillips curve is essentially vertical: The unemployment rate has hovered around 3.6 percent, and inflation has varied from 7 percent (in June) to 5.3 percent (in December). The recent experience raises the question: What happened to the Phillips curve that it is acting so differently now than in the pre-pandemic period? Freshwater macroeconomists would once again argue that this difference shows the Phillips curve is a statistical anomaly and should not be used as a foundational element guiding monetary policy. Having grown up in the profession surrounded by freshwater macroeconomists, I am very sympathetic to this argument. But setting that view aside for now, let's consider the two other possible stories I've mentioned to explain the data. The first story relies on inflation expectations becoming unanchored and causing the short-run Phillips curve to shift around. This theory is illustrated infigure 4. There is a vertical long-run Phillips curve anchored at U*, which is the rate of unemployment that occurs in the absence of price stickiness, and realized inflation is equal to inflation expectations. And there is a downward sloping short-run Phillips curve that shows a tradeoff between inflation and unemployment due to some nominal price or wage stickiness in the economy. The short-run Phillips curve assumes a given level of inflation expectations. If inflation expectations increase, the short-run Phillips curve shifts up. So, if inflation expectations have increased in recent history, we would move from a lower to a higher Phillips curve, as shown by the vertical shift up in the dots. These shifting dots generate what, on the surface, looks like an essentially vertical Phillips curve, thereby matching the 2022 data. The second possible explanation follows from the New Keynesian Phillips curve where there is a sudden increase in the frequency of price changes.5In that model, the slope of the Phillips curve is determined by the frequency of price changes—the more often prices change, the steeper is the Phillips curve. This dynamic is illustrated infigure 5. An increase in the frequency of price changes steepens the short-run Phillips curve even if inflation expectations are well anchored at 2 percent. If in recent years the frequency of price changes has increased, we would move from a flatter to a steeper short-run Phillips curve. On the surface, moving from the blue to red dot, it again looks like an essentially vertical Phillips curve, but just as in the first story, the data are showing us points on different Phillips curves. What does this suggest about the relationship between inflation and labor market slack and the implications for monetary policy? The answer depends on data about inflation expectations and the frequency of output price changes. Let's look at each of these factors. Figure 6reproduces two charts on inflation expectations from the Federal Reserve's March 2023Monetary Policy Report.6The charts show that the behavior of inflation expectations depends on the data one uses to measure those expectations.7The left panel reports survey-based measures, while the right panel captures market-based inflation expectations over a variety of time horizons. On the left, we see that shorter-run inflation expectations followed observed inflation up and down in recent years, with a notable increase in 2021 before reversing course in 2022 and into early 2023. But inflation expectations over a longer horizon remained within the range of values seen in the years before the pandemic and appear broadly consistent with the FOMC's longer-run 2 percent inflation objective. Similarly, in the right panel, market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation are also broadly in line with readings seen in the years before the pandemic. So, overall, measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained contained, while shorter-term expectations had moved up in 2021 and have partially reversed their earlier increases. These data suggest that changes in inflation can be associated with an unanchoring of inflation expectations if we believe price-setting behavior is influenced by changes in shorter-term inflation expectations. Let's now look at the data on the frequency of output price changes in 2021 and 2022. Preliminary work by Montag and Villar Vallenas (2023) uses U.S. Consumer Price Index micro-data to examine about 90,000 individual prices each month and determines if there was a change and, if so, was the change an increase or decrease.Figure 7summarizes their findings. The monthly price change frequency (the black line) increased from about 10 percent of the sample in 2019 to around 20 percent by the end of 2021 and held around that level in 2022. The increase in price change frequency is primarily driven by firms upwardly adjusting their prices (the red dashed line) during this period. Furthermore, anecdotal evidence I have received from market contacts is consistent with the view that firms were quicker to change prices over 2021-22 than they were in the previous decade. So, hard and soft data suggest that the frequency of price changes is contributing to what looks like a steep Phillips curve in recent years. Other than providing for a fun academic discussion, what does this analysis mean for monetary policy makers? If unanchored inflation expectations were driving what looks like a shifting Phillips curve, this would be extremely problematic for central bankers because it could require dramatic actions by the FOMC to lower inflation expectations to shift the Phillips curve back down. In current circumstances, one would need to believe it is shorter-term expectations that matter for price setters. If this belief is true, I take some comfort in the fact that short-term inflation expectations have moved down reasonably fast over the past year. However, I am not sure how much weight to put on this story. The higher-frequency-of-price-changes story is a more encouraging guide for central bankers. A steep Phillips curve means inflation can be brought down quickly with relatively little pain in terms of higher unemployment. Recent data are consistent with this story. To conclude, it may not surprise you all that I like story number two a lot better. But we will need more data to conclude which story is right—which is what a data-dependent central bank does to implement appropriate monetary policy. With that, I will stop talking, and I look forward to a robust discussion with lots of good arguments telling me I am wrong. ReferencesRobert J. Barro, David B. Gordon. A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, No. 4 (Aug. 1983), pp. 589-610. Aleksander, Berentsen, Guido Menzio and Randall Wright (2011). Inflation and Unemployment in the Long Run, American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 1, (Feb. 2011), pp. 371-98. Olivier Blanchard, Alex Domash and Lawrence H. Summers. Bad News for the Fed from the Beveridge Space, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Briefs, 22-7, July 2022. Andrew Figura and Christopher Waller. What Does the Beveridge Curve Tell Us About the Likelihood of a Soft Landing?FEDS Notes, July 29, 2022. Milton Friedman. Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment,Journal of Political Economy,Vol. 85, No. 3 (June 1977), pp. 451–472. Yuriy Gorodnichenko. Why Did We Miscast Inflation? Panel discussion, US Monetary Policy Forum, (Feb. 2023) Robert Hall. A Major Shock Makes Prices More Flexible and May Result in a Burst of Inflation or Deflation, NBER Working Paper No. 31025, March 2023. Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott. Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 3 (June 1977), pp. 473-492 Hugh Montag and Daniel Villar Vallenas.Price-Setting in the Covid Era. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. But there is a debate that the long-run Phillips curve is positively sloped. Friedman (1977) provides an intuitive explanation for a positive slope while Berentsen, Menzio and Wright (2011) derive it formally in a New Monetarist model.Return to text 3. The FOMC began using an explicit 2 percent inflation target in 2012, but before then it was presumed to be targeting 2 percent.Return to text 4. See Figura and Waller (2022) for a discussion of how much unemployment necessarily needed to rise to bring inflation down toward the FOMC's 2 percent target. This view was not universal, see Blanchard, Domas and Summers (2022).Return to text 5. Hall (2023) suggests that in times of high volatility of price determinants—costs and productivity—, like around the time of the pandemic, firms will adjust their prices more frequently than in other times.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),Monetary Policy Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March).Return to text 7. Gorodnichenko (2023) recently argued at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum that inflation expectations of households and firms have become unanchored.Return to text Accessible Version