The federal bank regulatory agencies announced today that they will extend until October 30, 2024, the comment period on a request for information on bank-fintech arrangements involving banking products and services. The agencies are seeking input on the nature and implications of bank-fintech arrangements and effective risk management practices. Extending the comment period will allow the public more time to consider the request, prepare comments, and address the questions posed by the agencies. Comments were originally due by September 30, 2024. Federal Registernotice: Request for Information on Bank-Fintech Arrangements Involving Banking Products and Services Distributed to Consumers and Businesses; Extension of Comment Period
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Nashville, Tennessee I have some brief comments on the economy and monetary policy and look forward to our discussion. Our economy is strong overall and has made significant progress over the past two years toward achieving our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Labor market conditions are solid, having cooled from their previously overheated state. Inflation has eased, and my Federal Open Market Committee colleagues and I have greater confidence that it is on a sustainable path to 2 percent. At our meeting earlier this month, we reduced the level of policy restraint by lowering the target range of the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point. That decision reflects our growing confidence that, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the labor market can be maintained in an environment of moderate economic growth and inflation moving sustainably down to our objective. Recent Economic DataThe labor marketMany indicators show the labor market is solid. To mention just a few, the unemployment rate is well within the range of estimates of its natural rate. Layoffs are low. The labor force participation rate of individuals aged 25 to 54 (so-called prime age) is near its historic high, and the prime-age women's participation rate has continued to reach new all-time highs. Real wages are increasing at a solid pace, broadly in line with gains in productivity. The ratio of job openings to unemployed workers has moved down steadily but remains just above 1—so that there are still more open positions than there are people seeking work. Prior to 2019, that was rarely the case. Still, labor market conditions have clearly cooled over the past year. Workers now view jobs as somewhat less available than they were in 2019. The moderation in job growth and the increase in labor supply have led the unemployment rate to increase to 4.2 percent, still low by historical standards. We do not believe that we need to see further cooling in labor market conditions to achieve 2 percent inflation. InflationOver the most recent 12 months, headline and core inflation were 2.2 percent and 2.7 percent, respectively. Disinflation has been broad based, and recent data indicate further progress toward a sustained return to 2 percent. Core goods prices have fallen 0.5 percent over the past year, close to their pre-pandemic pace, as supply bottlenecks have eased. Outside of housing, core services inflation is also close to its pre-pandemic pace. Housing services inflation continues to decline, but sluggishly. The growth rate in rents charged to new tenants remains low. As long as that remains the case, housing services inflation will continue to decline. Broader economic conditions also set the table for further disinflation. The labor market is now roughly in balance. Longer-run inflation expectations remain well anchored. Monetary PolicyOver the past year, we have continued to see solid growth and healthy gains in the labor force and productivity. Our goal all along has been to restore price stability without the kind of painful rise in unemployment that has frequently accompanied efforts to bring down high inflation. That would be a highly desirable result for the communities, families, and businesses we serve. While the task is not complete, we have made a good deal of progress toward that outcome. For much of the past three years, inflation ran well above our goal, and the labor market was extremely tight. Appropriately, our focus was on bringing down inflation. By keeping monetary policy restrictive, we helped restore the balance between overall supply and demand in the economy. That patient approach has paid dividends: Inflation is now much closer to our 2 percent objective. Today, we see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as roughly in balance. Our policy rate had been at a two-decade high since the July 2023 meeting. At the time of that meeting, core inflation was above 4 percent, well above our target, and unemployment was 3.5 percent, near a 50-year low. In the 14 months since, inflation has moved down, and unemployment has moved up, in both cases significantly. It was time for a recalibration of our policy stance to reflect progress toward our goals as well as the changed balance of risks. As I mentioned, our decision to reduce our policy rate by 50 basis points reflects our growing confidence that, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the labor market can be maintained in a context of moderate economic growth and inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent. Looking forward, if the economy evolves broadly as expected, policy will move over time toward a more neutral stance. But we are not on any preset course. The risks are two-sided, and we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. As we consider additional policy adjustments, we will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Overall, the economy is in solid shape; we intend to use our tools to keep it there. We remain resolute in our commitment to our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. Thank you. I look forward to our conversation.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it will host the 2nd Thomas Laubach Research Conference on May 15-16, 2025. The conference will highlight research focusing on monetary policy and the economy. As such, it is expected to provide timely academic perspectives for the monetary policy framework review that the Federal Reserve has committed to conduct every five years. The first review was completed in 2020. Details about the next monetary policy framework review will be announced in the coming months. The conference will be broadcast live atfederalreserve.gov. Additional details on the agenda will be available closer to the conference. For media inquiries, please e-mail[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Community Bankshares, Inc., LaGrange, GeorgiaWritten Agreement dated September 16, 2009Terminated September 11, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Fieldpoint Private Holdings, Inc., Greenwich, Connecticut and Fieldpoint Private Bank and Trust, Greenwich, ConnecticutWritten Agreement dated September 4, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: First Interstate Bank, Billings, MontanaFlood insurance violations, civil money penalty, dated August 28, 2024 United Texas Bank, Dallas, TexasCease and Desist Order dated August 29, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday requested public input around the operational practices of the discount window, which provides short-term credit for banks and credit unions. Feedback gathered through this process will be used by the Board and the Reserve Banks, which administer the discount window, to further improve the efficiency and ease of access to discount window and intraday credit. The discount window is an effective tool that plays an important role in supporting the liquidity and stability of the banking system. By providing ready access to funding against a wide range of collateral, it supports the smooth flow of credit to households and businesses. The Reserve Banks also provide intraday credit to eligible institutions, which supports the safety and soundness of the payments system. While the discount window continues to operate effectively, the Board and Reserve Banks seek to be proactive to ensure that it remains effective and efficient as the banking system continues to evolve. Specifically, the request for information seeks input on Federal Reserve operational practices, including: the collection of legal documentation; the process for pledging and withdrawing collateral; the process for requesting, receiving, and repaying discount window loans; the extension of intraday credit; and Reserve Bank communication practices related to the discount window and intraday credit. The comment period will close 90 days after the request for information is published in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Request for Information and Comment on Operational Aspects of Federal Reserve Bank Extensions of Discount Window and Intraday Credit (PDF)
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and Government, Harvard Kennedy School, Cambridge, Massachusetts Thank you, John, and thank you for the opportunity to speak here today.1It is good to be back at the Kennedy School and in particular at the Mossavar-Rahmani Center, which has a long tradition of engaging on important policy issues. In my remarks today, I will provide my outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for monetary policy. The combination of significant ongoing progress in reducing inflation and a cooling in the labor market means that the time has come to begin easing monetary policy, and I strongly supported the decision last week by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to cut the federal funds rate by 50 basis points. While future actions by the FOMC will depend on data we receive on inflation, employment, and economic activity, if conditions continue to evolve in the direction traveled thus far, then additional cuts will be appropriate. I will begin by summarizing where we stand on inflation, including details on how the different components of inflation have changed over time, since these facts form the basis for my judgment on where inflation is headed. I will then talk about the recent cooling in the labor market and the forces driving it as well as how shifts on this other side of our mandate fit into the overall economic outlook for the rest of this year. I will conclude with the implications of all this for appropriate monetary policy and our focus on our dual mandate. Inflation based on personal consumption expenditures (PCE) has come down from a peak of 7.1 percent on a year-on-year basis to 2.5 percent in July. Core PCE inflation, which excludes energy and food prices and tends to be less volatile, has come down from a peak of 5.6 percent to now 2.6 percent. Based on consumer and producer price indexes, I estimate headline PCE and core PCE inflation to be at about 2.2 and 2.7 percent, respectively, in August, consistent with ongoing progress toward the FOMC's 2 percent target. The progress on inflation is good news, but it is important to remember that households and businesses are still dealing with prices for many goods and services that are significantly higher than a couple of years ago. Prices for groceries, for example, are about 20 percent higher than before inflation started rising in 2021, and while earnings have been rising faster than inflation, it may take some time for it to feel as though prices are back to normal.2 Inflation data are produced by the Labor Department, and when I served as chief economist at Labor, I delved into the differential effects of inflation on various demographic groups. When inflation was at its peak in 2022, it was more than 1 percentage point higher for lower-income households, for those without a college degree, and for those aged 18 to 29—all groups that spend a higher share of income on necessities and have less wealth to draw from.3Fortunately, research by staff at the Fed shows that disinflation helps close that gap as well, something that only adds to the urgency I feel about returning inflation to the FOMC's 2 percent goal. Research on the causes of inflation and the subsequent disinflation show that both supply and demand forces have played an important role. In the past two years, specifically, improvements in supply, along with moderation in demand in part due to tighter monetary policy, have both played a role in the disinflationary process.4Supply chain bottlenecks as well as the drastic drop in the labor force due to excess retirements and the withdrawal of prime-age workers contributed to the initial rise in inflation, but the resolution of these disruptions and the return of workers to the labor force have also helped rein in inflation. Early on, consumers shifted spending from services to goods, a development that goods producers struggled to accommodate, putting upward pressure on prices. But as the demand shock to goods unwound and consumer spending shifted back to services, goods inflation fell and has been running below zero in recent months. Also, the increased demand due to the fiscal response to COVID-19 in 2020 and 2021 has more recently been roughly neutral on growth, as shown by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy in their measure of fiscal impact. And, of course, as I will discuss in a moment, tight monetary policy has been and continues to be a moderating force on demand, primarily by raising costs for interest-sensitive goods and services. As I think about where inflation is headed, I find it helpful to consider how it has evolved over the past several years and in particular how the major components of inflation have behaved, so I want to take a few minutes to walk through those details. As I have indicated, the big picture is that goods inflation surged early on in 2020 and 2021, followed by prices for services excluding housing, and then housing, with some overlap in those steps. Disinflation has followed that course in reverse. Core goods inflation rose, after almost a year of social distancing shifted spending from services and after production and delivery of goods was disrupted by the pandemic. This was a big change because over the long expansion leading to the pandemic, core goods prices actually fell, slightly but consistently.5On a 12-month basis, core PCE goods inflation rose above zero in December 2020, reached a peak of 7.6 percent in February 2022, and fell again below zero at the end of 2023. In July of this year, it was negative 0.5 percent. This recent disinflation offset still-rising prices for services and helped reduce overall inflation. Goods inflation has reverted to its longer-term pattern as demand has moderated and supply chain problems have abated. This is reflected by various indexes of supply chain bottlenecks that showed the supply-side disruptions that contributed early on to surging inflation have now retreated to pre-pandemic levels.6Other data show that computer chip supply, which fell far short of demand early in the pandemic, is back to normal conditions as well. Food and energy prices, always subject to larger ups and downs than other parts of inflation, rose also early on. Food inflation increased in 2020 as shoppers began stockpiling groceries and as warehouses and production facilities had difficulty staffing due to COVID. After Russia's invasion of Ukraine, energy price inflation reached a peak 12-month rate of nearly 45 percent and food inflation reached a peak of 12 percent in mid-2022, highlighting the importance of petroleum and agricultural commodities from that part of the world. Food and energy inflation has moderated over the past two years and are now both running at 12-month rates of 1.4 percent and 1.9 percent, respectively, as supply chain issues have resolved and production in the U.S. and elsewhere has increased. Food and energy expenses represent a sizable share of consumer spending, but the frequent purchase of these goods means that they are highly salient in the public's views on inflation. Research by Francesco D'Acunto and coauthors has shown that the weights that consumers assign to price changes in forming their inflation expectations are not based on the actual share of their expenditures but instead on the frequency of purchases, which happen to be highest for food and energy goods.7Thus, the fall in food and energy prices is important because it may feed back into lower inflation in other categories by moderating overall inflation expectations and also real wage expectations in wage bargaining. Housing services price increases were the last component of inflation to escalate, rising to a peak 12-month rate of 8.3 percent in April 2023 and moderating to a 5.3 percent pace in July. It took time for housing prices to escalate and has taken longer for them to moderate because of both the nature of the rental market and the data collection method from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, as I have discussed at length in other speeches.8However, new rent increases, which better capture rental price changes in real time, are falling and are the main reason why I expect housing services costs to moderate further. The final component of inflation is services excluding housing, which accounts for 50 percent of PCE inflation and is heavily influenced by labor markets. On a 12-month basis, this component of inflation rose to a peak of 5.3 percent in December 2021, stayed persistently high until February 2023, and has moderated since then to 3.3 percent in July of this year. Its escalation was driven both by the rise in labor costs and by the transition of demand from goods to services following the pandemic. Labor costs are a substantial share of the total costs for services. For example, labor accounts for between 60 percent to 80 percent of costs in construction, education, and health services. Among the initial forces driving the escalation in wages were the increase in food and energy prices, as wage demands tend to track closely with the prices of these frequently purchased goods. Data on wage demands from the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations indeed show a sudden increase early on during the pandemic right after the first bout of food inflation.9Importantly, worker shortages likely allowed those higher wage demands to be realized, contributing to the rise in wages. Later, as demand for services quickly rose and employers were creating a large number of jobs in several service sectors, workers were able to be more selective, and the ensuing "Great Resignation" took hold, allowing people to choose different careers. The relatively high demand relative to the supply of workers in some service sectors encouraged workers to move from job to job for higher wages, benefits, and other improvements in working conditions. Evidence from the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker suggests that during this period, wages for job switchers grew more than 2 percentage points faster than wages for people staying in the same job, though this wage premium for job switchers disappeared by the second half of last year. But now inflation for services excluding housing is declining, after a temporary escalation in the first quarter of this year that was likely partly due to residual seasonality. There had been fears that wage increases would drive a wage–price spiral, as the U.S. experienced in the 1970s, but this did not occur. To sum up, inflation has broadly moderated as the supply of goods and services has improved, and as producers and consumers have adjusted to the effects of higher prices. Demand has moderated, in part due to tighter monetary policy. And, as I just noted, changes in the pace of wage growth have also played an important role in the ups and downs of inflation, which points me toward a discussion of labor markets, which has recently become a greater focus of monetary policy. As I have noted, there has been a significant moderation in the labor market recently, but I want to start by pointing to what really has been a remarkable performance of the labor market over the past four years. After the unprecedented job losses early in the pandemic, and even accounting for the quick recovery of a large share of those losses, the recovery of the labor market that followed was historically swift. Unemployment was 7.8 percent in September 2020 and 4.7 percent only 12 months later, and it fell to under 4 percent 3 months after that. That is a more rapid recovery than the U.S. has experienced since the 1960's. What started, at that point, was 30 straight months of unemployment at or below 4 percent, which had not happened during the pre-pandemic period, the boom of the 1990s, or anytime during the 1980s, and it was only exceeded by the strong labor market of the latter half of the 1960s. Something that I think was just as remarkable has been the narrowing of the typical gap between labor market outcomes for less-advantaged groups. For example, there has been a reduction in the unemployment rate between Black and Latino workers, on the one hand, and white workers, on the other hand. There has also been a narrowing of the prime-age labor force participation rate among these groups, and, perhaps most notable of all, wage inequality among them has narrowed, which is not typical during economic expansions, according to research by David Autor and several coauthors.10They found that one benefit of the unusually tight labor market of the past few years was that the heightened competition for scarce workers produced more rapid wage gains for workers at the bottom of the wage distribution. The real wage gains for those in the lower quartiles of the distribution and with higher propensities to consume, in turn, likely spurred consumption and helped sustain growth after the pandemic. After a couple of years in which labor demand exceeded supply, the labor market has come into balance, reflecting an economy that has moderated in part due to tighter monetary policy. On the labor supply side, two forces have contributed to this rebalancing of the labor market. Labor force participation suffered due to the disruptions in work during the pandemic but rebounded strongly in 2022 and 2023 as the labor market tightened and wages rose sharply. The labor force participation rate for prime-age women reached historic highs over the past year and reached yet another historic record high in August. The overall increase in participation among workers aged 25 to 54, in the prime of their working lives, helped offset the loss of many workers aged 55 and over who experienced excess retirements during the pandemic. The second force boosting labor supply has been the large increase in immigration. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that net immigration boosted the U.S. population by close to 6 million people in 2022 and 2023, the majority of them of working age, and, by most accounts, rates of immigration have remained high in 2024. As a result of improved supply and easing of demand for workers, the labor market has rebalanced. After running at very low levels, unemployment has edged up this year to 4.2 percent in August, still quite low by historical standards. The slowdown in labor demand is most evident in payroll numbers. Job creation averaged 267,000 a month in the first quarter of the year and now stands at an average of 116,000 in the three months ending in August, which is still a healthy pace of job creation. Yet, given recent revisions in the payroll numbers, it is important to continue monitoring additional labor market indicators. In addition, the fall in diffusion indexes suggests that job creation cooling has been broad based, complementing the payroll data in showing rebalances in demand and supply across sectors. Beyond payroll data, voluntary quits, which tend to reflect the rate at which people find a better job, are now back around where they were before the pandemic. The ratio of job vacancies to the number of people looking for work, the V/U ratio, has also fallen close to its pre-pandemic ratio.11In summary, after a period of demand exceeding supply, the labor market appears to have rebalanced. In tandem with the cooling in the labor market, economic activity has slowed but is still expanding at a solid pace. After adjusting for inflation, gross domestic product (GDP) grew 2.5 percent in 2023 and at around a 2 percent annual rate in the first half of 2024. Personal spending, which accounts for the majority of economic activity, has been solid this year, supported by a resilient labor market so far and high levels of household wealth relative to income. But given a rise in credit card and auto delinquencies, a rise in credit card balances, and a cooling labor market, I expect spending to grow at a somewhat more moderate pace moving forward. Certainly, tight monetary policy has contributed to cool off aggregate demand and slow the economy. It has done so in large part by slowing spending on interest-sensitive expenditures, such as housing, as well as autos and other durable goods. Other spending typically financed with credit, such as business equipment, has also been slower. Another effect of tight monetary policy is to keep expectations of future inflation in check. And, to the extent that expectations affect decisions by businesses to set prices and by workers to negotiate wages, this has helped put downward pressure on inflation. Survey- and market-based measures of future inflation did increase when inflation surged, but only modestly, and they have moved down in tandem with inflation and have largely returned to their 2019 levels. In conclusion, I would say that recent economic developments, against the backdrop of the experience of the past four years, have validated the Federal Reserve's focus on reducing inflation and set the stage for the shift in monetary policy that occurred last week. The progress in bringing down inflation thus far, coupled with the softening in the labor market that I have described, means that while our focus should remain on continuing to bring inflation to 2 percent, we should now also shift attention to the maximum-employment side of the FOMC's dual mandate. The labor market remains resilient, but the FOMC now needs to balance its focus so we can continue making progress on disinflation while avoiding unnecessary pain and weakness in the economy as disinflation continues in the right trajectory. I strongly supported last week's decision and, if progress on inflation continues as I expect, I will support additional cuts in the federal funds rate going forward. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Unlike in previous recoveries, those in the lower half of the distribution have benefited more from the real earnings increases during the post-pandemic period. The 12-month change in average hourly earnings and the employment cost index have been rising faster than consumer price index inflation for those in the first and second quartiles since 2019 and since 2022, respectively, and for everyone across the distribution for roughly a year.Return to text 3. See Xavier Jaravel (2021), "Inflation Inequality: Measurement, Causes, and Policy Implications,"Annual Review of Economics,vol. 13, pp. 599–629.Return to text 4. Different approaches allow a parsing of the relative contributions of supply and demand, top-down approaches by Bernanke and Blanchard (forthcoming) and Benigno and Eggertson (2023) and bottom-up approaches by Braun, Flaaen, and Hoke (2024) and Shapiro (2022); see Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard (forthcoming), "What Caused the U.S. Pandemic-Era Inflation?"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics; Pierpaolo Benigno and Gauti B. Eggertsson (2023),"It's Baaack: The Surge in Inflation in the 2020s and the Return of the Non-Linear Phillips Curve,"NBER Working Paper Series 31197 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April); Robin Braun, Aaron Flaaen, and Sinem Hacioglu Hoke (2024),"Supply vs Demand Factors Influencing Prices of Manufactured Goods,"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 23); and Adam Hale Shapiro (2022),"How Much Do Supply and Demand Drive Inflation?"FRBSF Economic Letter 2022-15 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June 21). All of these studies agree that both supply and demand shocks contributed to the surge in inflation as well as its fall.Return to text 5. The causes most often cited by economists are competition from globalized trade and productivity gains, including from technological advances.Return to text 6. The most commonly used indicators of supply chain bottlenecks are the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Supplier Deliveries Index from the Institute for Supply Management, and the percent of answers to the question of why production is not at capacity in the Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization fielded by the Census Bureau and funded by the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 7. See Francesco D'Acunto, Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber (2021), "Exposure to Grocery Prices and Inflation Expectations,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 129 (May), 1615–39.Return to text 8. Rental prices are the basis for all estimates of housing service costs. Prices tend to change only when rented homes change tenants, which happens relatively infrequently. Prices tend to change more when there are new tenants, while the majority of lease renewals tend to keep the same price-generating persistence. In addition, the Bureau of Economic Analysis samples rents only every six months. As a result, substantial lags are built into the official statistics. See Adriana D. Kugler (2024),"The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy,"speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., February 7; Adriana D. Kugler (2024),"Some Reasons for Optimism about Inflation,"speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., June 18.Return to text 9. The Survey of Consumer Expectations from the New York Fed collects data on "reservation wages," which are what workers report as being the minimum wage that they would require to accept a job.Return to text 10. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2024),"The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market,"NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised May 2024). Using Current Population Survey microdata, they show that increased labor market competition for scarce workers produced more rapid real wage gains at the bottom of the wage distribution, reducing wage inequality.Return to text 11. I consider here a V/U ratio in which the numerator is the ratio of the vacancy rate for the total nonfarm sector computed as job openings over the labor force. Job openings data are from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey fielded by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The denominator is the unemployment rate. The last data point available for job openings is July 2024, while the last data point for the unemployment rate is August.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the 10th Annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Hello, everyone, and welcome to the 10th Annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference. "Tenth annual" is a phrase that generates a bit of surprise, and much pride. It is surprising because it does not seem like the first of these gatherings, which I was honored to play a role in organizing, was all that long ago. But we can also take pride because the conference has proven useful and important for a full decade, as I expect it will do for many more years to come. Much has changed in the economy since we first gathered in 2015—but the importance of the U.S. Treasury market has not. As you all know, this market is the deepest and most liquid in the world. In addition to meeting the financing needs of the federal government, it plays a critical role in the implementation of monetary policy. It is no exaggeration to say that the Treasury market is part of the bedrock of our economy and indeed of the world economy. The October '14 flash crash and the subsequent publication of the Interagency Working Group report on that event are what brought us together for the first annual conference.1October 2014 was a wakeup call because there had never been such a large swing in Treasury prices in such a short period of time. The Interagency Working Group report shed light on how much the structure of the Treasury market had changed and how large a role high-speed, electronic trading firms were playing in it. It also showed the value of cooperation and communication between the five agencies in the working group, something that proved again to be vital during the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. I am pleased to see that all working group members are represented here today. You will be hearing directly from many senior leaders, including your host, President Williams; Vice Chair Barr; and Secretary Yellen, who, of course, was Fed chair at the time of the first conference. It is essential that our Treasury markets are able to efficiently transform Treasury securities into cash, even at times of elevated stress. As I noted at this event in 2015, "these markets need to keep functioning at a high level, and we all have a stake in making sure that they do." I remain wholly dedicated to that goal.2 I wish you a productive and educational conference. Thank you. 1. See Interagency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance,Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014(PDF)(Washington: Interagency Working Group, July 2015).Return to text 2. See Jerome H. Powell,"Opening Remarks"(speech at the 2015 Roundtable on Treasury Markets and Debt Management: Evolution of Treasury Market and Its Implications, New York, NY, November 20, 2015).Return to text i. Note: On September 26, 2024, the text of the speech was updated to reflect the delivered remarks in the video version of this speech.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Georgia Bankers Association President/CEO Conference, Charleston, South Carolina Good morning. I would like to thank the Georgia Bankers Association for the invitation to join you today for your annual conference.1I appreciate the opportunity to share my views on the U.S. economy and monetary policy before we engage on community banking issues and other matters affecting the banking industry. In light of the recent Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, I will begin my remarks by providing some perspective on my vote and will then share my current views on the economy and monetary policy. Update on the Most Recent FOMC MeetingIn order to address high inflation, for more than two years, the FOMC increased and held the federal funds rate at a restrictive level. At our September meeting, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point to 4-3/4 to 5 percent and to continue reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. As the post-meeting statement noted, I dissented from the FOMC's decision, preferring instead to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 5 to 5‑1/4 percent. Last Friday, once our FOMC participant communications blackout period concluded, the Board of Governors released my statement explaining the decision to depart from the majority of the voting members. I agreed with the Committee's assessment that, given the progress we have seen since the middle of 2023 on both lowering inflation and cooling the labor market, it was appropriate to reflect this progress by recalibrating the level of the federal funds rate and begin the process of moving toward a more neutral stance of policy. As my statement notes, I preferred a smaller initial cut in the policy rate while the U.S. economy remains strong and inflation remains a concern, despite recent progress. Economic Conditions and OutlookIn recent months, we have seen some further progress on slowing the pace of inflation, with monthly readings lower than the elevated pace seen in the first three months of the year. The 12-month measure of core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which provides a broader perspective than the more volatile higher-frequency readings, has moved down since April, although it came in at 2.7 percent in August, again remaining well above our 2 percent goal. The persistently high core inflation largely reflects pressures on housing prices, perhaps due in part to low inventories of affordable housing. The progress in lowering inflation since April is a welcome development, but core inflation is still uncomfortably above the Committee's 2 percent goal. Prices remain much higher than before the pandemic, which continues to weigh on consumer sentiment. Higher prices have an outsized effect on lower- and moderate-income households, as these households devote a significantly larger share of income to food, energy, and housing. Prices for these spending categories have far outpaced overall inflation over the past few years. Economic growth moderated earlier this year after coming in stronger last year. Private domestic final purchases (PDFP) growth has been solid and slowed much less than gross domestic product (GDP), as the slowdown in GDP growth was partly driven by volatile categories including net exports, suggesting that underlying economic growth was stronger than GDP indicated. PDFP has continued to increase at a solid pace so far in the third quarter, despite some further weakening in housing activity, as retail sales have shown further robust gains in July and August. Although personal consumption has remained resilient, consumers appear to be pulling back on discretionary items and expenses, as evidenced in part by a decline in restaurant spending since late last year. Low- and moderate-income consumers no longer have extra savings to support this type of spending, and we have seen loan delinquency rates normalize from historically low levels during the pandemic. The most recent labor market report shows that payroll employment gains have slowed appreciably to a pace moderately above 100,000 per month over the three months ending in August. The unemployment rate edged down to 4.2 percent in August from 4.3 percent in July. While unemployment is notably higher than a year ago, it is still at a historically low level and below my and the Congressional Budget Office's estimates of full employment. The labor market has loosened from the extremely tight conditions of the past few years. The ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers has declined further to a touch below the historically elevated pre-pandemic level—a sign that the number of available workers and the number of available jobs have come into better balance. But there are still more available jobs than available workers, a condition that before 2018 has only occurred twice for a prolonged period since World War II, further signaling ongoing labor market strength despite the reported data. Although wage growth has slowed further in recent months, it remains indicative of a tight labor market. At just under 4 percent, as measured by both the employment cost index and average hourly earnings, wage gains are still above the pace consistent with our inflation goal given trend productivity growth. The rise in the unemployment rate this year largely reflects weaker hiring, as job seekers entering or re-entering the labor force are taking longer to find work, while layoffs remain low. In addition to some cooling in labor demand, there are other factors likely contributing the increased unemployment. A mismatch between the skills of the new workers and available jobs could further raise unemployment, suggesting that higher unemployment has been partly driven by the stronger supply of workers. It is also likely that some temporary factors contributed to the recent rise in the unemployment rate, as unemployment among working age teenagers sharply increased in August. Preference for a More Measured Recalibration of PolicyThe U.S. economy remains strong and core inflation remains uncomfortably above our 2 percent target. In light of these economic conditions, a few further considerations supported the case for a more measured approach in beginning the process to recalibrate our policy stance to remove restriction and move toward a more neutral setting. First, I was concerned that reducing the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point could be interpreted as a signal that the Committee sees some fragility or greater downside risks to the economy. In the current economic environment, with no clear signs of material weakening or fragility, in my view, beginning the rate-cutting cycle with a 1/4 percentage point move would have better reinforced the strength in economic conditions, while also confidently recognizing progress toward our goals. In my mind, a more measured approach would have avoided the risk of unintentionally signaling concerns about underlying economic conditions. Second, I was also concerned that reducing the policy rate by 1/2 percentage point could have led market participants to expect that the Committee would lower the target range by that same pace at future meetings until the policy rate approaches a neutral level. If this expectation had materialized, we could have seen an unwarranted decline in longer-term interest rates and broader financial conditions could become overly accommodative. This outcome could work against the Committee's goal of returning inflation to our 2 percent target. I am pleased that Chair Powell directly addressed both of these concerns during the press conference following the most recent FOMC meeting. Third, there continues to be a considerable amount of pent-up demand and cash on the sidelines ready to be deployed as the path of interest rates moves down. Bringing the policy rate down too quickly carries the risk of unleashing that pent-up demand. A more measured approach would also avoid unnecessarily stoking demand and potentially reigniting inflationary pressures. Finally, in dialing back our restrictive stance of policy, we also need to be mindful of what the end point is likely to be. My estimate of the neutral rate is much higher than it was before the pandemic. Therefore, I think we are much closer to neutral than would have been the case under pre-pandemic conditions, and I did not see the peak stance of policy as restrictive to the same extent that my colleagues may have. With a higher estimate of neutral, for any given pace of rate reductions, we would arrive at our destination sooner. Ongoing Risks to the OutlookTurning to the risks to achieving our dual mandate, I continue to see greater risks to price stability, especially while the labor market continues to be near estimates of full employment. Although the labor market data have been showing signs of cooling in recent months, still-elevated wage growth, solid consumer spending, and resilient GDP growth are not consistent with a material economic weakening or fragility. My contacts also continue to mention that they are not planning layoffs and continue to have difficulty hiring. Therefore, I am taking less signal from the recent labor market data until there are clear trends indicating that both spending growth and the labor market have materially weakened. I suspect the recent immigration flows have and will continue to affect labor markets in ways that we do not yet fully understand and cannot yet accurately measure. In light of the dissonance created by conflicting economic signals, measurement challenges, and data revisions, I remain cautious about taking signal from only a limited set of real-time data releases. In my view, the upside risks to inflation remain prominent. Global supply chains continue to be susceptible to labor strikes and increased geopolitical tensions, which could result in inflationary effects on food, energy, and other commodity markets. Expansionary fiscal spending could also lead to inflationary risks, as could an increased demand for housing given the long-standing limited supply, especially of affordable housing. While it has not been my baseline outlook, I cannot rule out the risk that progress on inflation could continue to stall. Although it is important to recognize that there has been meaningful progress on lowering inflation, while core inflation remains around or above 2.5 percent, I see the risk that the Committee's larger policy action could be interpreted as a premature declaration of victory on our price-stability mandate. Accomplishing our mission of returning to low and stable inflation at our 2 percent goal is necessary to foster a strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone in the longer term. In light of these considerations, I believe that, by moving at a measured pace toward a more neutral policy stance, we will be better positioned to achieve further progress in bringing inflation down to our 2 percent target, while closely watching the evolution of labor market conditions. The Path ForwardDespite my dissent at the most recent FOMC meeting, I respect and appreciate that my FOMC colleagues preferred to begin the reduction in the federal funds rate with a larger initial cut in the target range for the policy rate. I remain committed to working together with my colleagues to ensure that monetary policy is appropriately positioned to achieve our goals of attaining maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent target. I will continue to monitor the incoming data and information as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy, and I will remain cautious in my approach to adjusting the stance of policy going forward. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook guided by the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. We need to ensure that the public understands clearly how current and expected deviations of inflation and employment from our mandated goals inform our policy decisions. By the time of our next meeting in November, we will have received updated reports on inflation, employment, and economic activity. We may also have a better understanding of how developments in longer-term interest rates and broader financial conditions might influence the economic outlook. During the intermeeting period, I will continue to visit with a broad range of contacts to discuss economic conditions as I assess the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance. As I noted earlier, I continue to view inflation as a concern. In light of the upside risks that I just described, it remains necessary to pay close attention to the price-stability side of our mandate while being attentive to the risks of a material weakening in the labor market. My view continues to be that restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. However, should the data evolve in a way that points to a material weakening in the labor market, I would support taking action and adjust monetary policy as needed while taking into account our inflation mandate. Closing ThoughtsIn closing, thank you again for welcoming me here today. It is a pleasure to join you and to have the opportunity to discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy. And given the recent FOMC meeting decision and my dissent, I appreciate being able to provide a more detailed explanation of the reasoning that led me to dissent in favor of a smaller reduction in the policy rate at the FOMC meeting. I look forward to answering your questions and to engaging with your members on bank regulatory and supervisory matters. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text i. On September 30, 2024, the speech was updated to clarify the references to the September 17-18, 2024 FOMC meeting.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Mid-Size Bank Coalition of America Board of Directors Workshop, Dallas, Texas Good morning. I would like to thank the Mid-Size Bank Coalition of America for the invitation to join you today for the Board of Directors Workshop.1I appreciate the opportunity to share my views on the U.S. economy and monetary policy before we engage on bank supervisory and regulatory issues and other matters affecting the banking industry. In light of last week's Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, I will begin my remarks by providing some perspective on my vote and will then share my current views on the economy and monetary policy. Update on the Most Recent FOMC MeetingIn order to address high inflation, for more than two years, the FOMC increased and held the federal funds rate at a restrictive level. At our September meeting, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point to 4-3/4 to 5 percent and to continue reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. As the post-meeting statement noted, I dissented from the FOMC's decision, preferring instead to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 5 to 5‑1/4 percent. Last Friday, once our FOMC participant communications blackout period concluded, the Board of Governors released my statement explaining the decision to depart from the majority of the voting members. I agreed with the Committee's assessment that, given the progress we have seen since the middle of 2023 on both lowering inflation and cooling the labor market, it was appropriate to reflect this progress by recalibrating the level of the federal funds rate and begin the process of moving toward a more neutral stance of policy. As my statement notes, I preferred a smaller initial cut in the policy rate while the U.S. economy remains strong and inflation remains a concern, despite recent progress. Economic Conditions and OutlookIn recent months, we have seen some further progress on slowing the pace of inflation, with monthly readings lower than the elevated pace seen in the first three months of the year. The 12-month measure of core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which provides a broader perspective than the more volatile higher-frequency readings, has moved down since April, although it came in at 2.6 percent in July, again remaining well above our 2 percent goal. In addition, the latest consumer and producer price index reports suggest that 12‑month core PCE inflation in August was likely a touch above the July reading. The persistently high core inflation largely reflects pressures on housing prices, perhaps due in part to low inventories of affordable housing. The progress in lowering inflation since April is a welcome development, but core inflation is still uncomfortably above the Committee's 2 percent goal. Prices remain much higher than before the pandemic, which continues to weigh on consumer sentiment. Higher prices have an outsized effect on lower- and moderate-income households, as these households devote a significantly larger share of income to food, energy, and housing. Prices for these spending categories have far outpaced overall inflation over the past few years. Economic growth moderated earlier this year after coming in stronger last year. Private domestic final purchases (PDFP) growth has been solid and slowed much less than gross domestic product (GDP), as the slowdown in GDP growth was partly driven by volatile categories including net exports, suggesting that underlying economic growth was stronger than GDP indicated. PDFP has continued to increase at a solid pace so far in the third quarter, despite some further weakening in housing activity, as retail sales have shown further robust gains in July and August. Although personal consumption has remained resilient, consumers appear to be pulling back on discretionary items and expenses, as evidenced in part by a decline in restaurant spending since late last year. Low- and moderate-income consumers no longer have extra savings to support this type of spending, and we have seen loan delinquency rates normalize from historically low levels during the pandemic. The most recent labor market report shows that payroll employment gains have slowed appreciably to a pace moderately above 100,000 per month over the three months ending in August. The unemployment rate edged down to 4.2 percent in August from 4.3 percent in July. While unemployment is notably higher than a year ago, it is still at a historically low level and below my and the Congressional Budget Office's estimates of full employment. The labor market has loosened from the extremely tight conditions of the past few years. The ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers has declined further to a touch below the historically elevated pre-pandemic level—a sign that the number of available workers and the number of available jobs have come into better balance. But there are still more available jobs than available workers, a condition that before 2018 has only occurred twice for a prolonged period since World War II, further signaling ongoing labor market strength despite the reported data. Although wage growth has slowed further in recent months, it remains indicative of a tight labor market. At just under 4 percent, as measured by both the employment cost index and average hourly earnings, wage gains are still above the pace consistent with our inflation goal given trend productivity growth. The rise in the unemployment rate this year largely reflects weaker hiring, as job seekers entering or re-entering the labor force are taking longer to find work, while layoffs remain low. In addition to some cooling in labor demand, there are other factors likely contributing the increased unemployment. A mismatch between the skills of the new workers and available jobs could further raise unemployment, suggesting that higher unemployment has been partly driven by the stronger supply of workers. It is also likely that some temporary factors contributed to the recent rise in the unemployment rate, as unemployment among working age teenagers sharply increased in August. Preference for a More Measured Recalibration of PolicyThe U.S. economy remains strong and core inflation remains uncomfortably above our 2 percent target. In light of these economic conditions, a few further considerations supported the case for a more measured approach in beginning the process to recalibrate our policy stance to remove restriction and move toward a more neutral setting. First, I was concerned that reducing the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point could be interpreted as a signal that the Committee sees some fragility or greater downside risks to the economy. In the current economic environment, with no clear signs of material weakening or fragility, in my view, beginning the rate-cutting cycle with a 1/4 percentage point move would have better reinforced the strength in economic conditions, while also confidently recognizing progress toward our goals. In my mind, a more measured approach would have avoided the risk of unintentionally signaling concerns about underlying economic conditions. Second, I was also concerned that reducing the policy rate by 1/2 percentage point could have led market participants to expect that the Committee would lower the target range by that same pace at future meetings until the policy rate approaches a neutral level. If this expectation had materialized, we could have seen an unwarranted decline in longer-term interest rates and broader financial conditions could become overly accommodative. This outcome could work against the Committee's goal of returning inflation to our 2 percent target. I am pleased that Chair Powell directly addressed both of these concerns during the press conference following last week's FOMC meeting. Third, there continues to be a considerable amount of pent-up demand and cash on the sidelines ready to be deployed as the path of interest rates moves down. Bringing the policy rate down too quickly carries the risk of unleashing that pent-up demand. A more measured approach would also avoid unnecessarily stoking demand and potentially reigniting inflationary pressures. Finally, in dialing back our restrictive stance of policy, we also need to be mindful of what the end point is likely to be. My estimate of the neutral rate is much higher than it was before the pandemic. Therefore, I think we are much closer to neutral than would have been the case under pre-pandemic conditions, and I did not see the peak stance of policy as restrictive to the same extent that my colleagues may have. With a higher estimate of neutral, for any given pace of rate reductions, we would arrive at our destination sooner. Ongoing Risks to the OutlookTurning to the risks to achieving our dual mandate, I continue to see greater risks to price stability, especially while the labor market continues to be near estimates of full employment. Although the labor market data have been showing signs of cooling in recent months, still-elevated wage growth, solid consumer spending, and resilient GDP growth are not consistent with a material economic weakening or fragility. My contacts also continue to mention that they are not planning layoffs and continue to have difficulty hiring. Therefore, I am taking less signal from the recent labor market data until there are clear trends indicating that both spending growth and the labor market have materially weakened. I suspect the recent immigration flows have and will continue to affect labor markets in ways that we do not yet fully understand and cannot yet accurately measure. In light of the dissonance created by conflicting economic signals, measurement challenges, and data revisions, I remain cautious about taking signal from only a limited set of real-time data releases. In my view, the upside risks to inflation remain prominent. Global supply chains continue to be susceptible to labor strikes and increased geopolitical tensions, which could result in inflationary effects on food, energy, and other commodity markets. Expansionary fiscal spending could also lead to inflationary risks, as could an increased demand for housing given the long-standing limited supply, especially of affordable housing. While it has not been my baseline outlook, I cannot rule out the risk that progress on inflation could continue to stall. Although it is important to recognize that there has been meaningful progress on lowering inflation, while core inflation remains around or above 2.5 percent, I see the risk that the Committee's larger policy action could be interpreted as a premature declaration of victory on our price-stability mandate. Accomplishing our mission of returning to low and stable inflation at our 2 percent goal is necessary to foster a strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone in the longer term. In light of these considerations, I believe that, by moving at a measured pace toward a more neutral policy stance, we will be better positioned to achieve further progress in bringing inflation down to our 2 percent target, while closely watching the evolution of labor market conditions. The Path ForwardDespite my dissent at the recent FOMC meeting, I respect and appreciate that my FOMC colleagues preferred to begin the reduction in the federal funds rate with a larger initial cut in the target range for the policy rate. I remain committed to working together with my colleagues to ensure that monetary policy is appropriately positioned to achieve our goals of attaining maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent target. I will continue to monitor the incoming data and information as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy, and I will remain cautious in my approach to adjusting the stance of policy going forward. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook guided by the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. We need to ensure that the public understands clearly how current and expected deviations of inflation and employment from our mandated goals inform our policy decisions. By the time of our next meeting in November, we will have received updated reports on inflation, employment, and economic activity. We may also have a better understanding of how developments in longer-term interest rates and broader financial conditions might influence the economic outlook. During the intermeeting period, I will continue to visit with a broad range of contacts to discuss economic conditions as I assess the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance. As I noted earlier, I continue to view inflation as a concern. In light of the upside risks that I just described, it remains necessary to pay close attention to the price-stability side of our mandate while being attentive to the risks of a material weakening in the labor market. My view continues to be that restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. However, should the data evolve in a way that points to a material weakening in the labor market, I would support taking action and adjust monetary policy as needed while taking into account our inflation mandate. Closing ThoughtsIn closing, thank you again for welcoming me here today. It is a pleasure to join you and to have the opportunity to discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy. And given the recent FOMC meeting decision and my dissent, I appreciate being able to provide a more detailed explanation of the reasoning that led me to dissent in favor of a smaller reduction in the policy rate at last week's FOMC meeting. I look forward to answering your questions and to engaging with your members on bank regulatory and supervisory matters. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2024 Kentucky Bankers Association Annual Convention, Hot Springs, Virginia Good morning. I would like to thank the Kentucky Bankers Association for the invitation to join you today for your annual convention.1I appreciate the opportunity to share my views on the U.S. economy and monetary policy before we engage on community banking issues and other matters affecting the banking industry. In light of last week's Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, I will begin my remarks by providing some perspective on my vote and will then share my current views on the economy and monetary policy. Update on the Most Recent FOMC MeetingIn order to address high inflation, for more than two years, the FOMC increased and held the federal funds rate at a restrictive level. At our September meeting, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point to 4-3/4 to 5 percent and to continue reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. As the post-meeting statement noted, I dissented from the FOMC's decision, preferring instead to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 5 to 5‑1/4 percent. Last Friday, once our FOMC participant communications blackout period concluded, the Board of Governors released my statement explaining the decision to depart from the majority of the voting members. I agreed with the Committee's assessment that, given the progress we have seen since the middle of 2023 on both lowering inflation and cooling the labor market, it was appropriate to reflect this progress by recalibrating the level of the federal funds rate and begin the process of moving toward a more neutral stance of policy. As my statement notes, I preferred a smaller initial cut in the policy rate while the U.S. economy remains strong and inflation remains a concern, despite recent progress. Economic Conditions and OutlookIn recent months, we have seen some further progress on slowing the pace of inflation, with monthly readings lower than the elevated pace seen in the first three months of the year. The 12-month measure of core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which provides a broader perspective than the more volatile higher-frequency readings, has moved down since April, although it came in at 2.6 percent in July, again remaining well above our 2 percent goal. In addition, the latest consumer and producer price index reports suggest that 12‑month core PCE inflation in August was likely a touch above the July reading. The persistently high core inflation largely reflects pressures on housing prices, perhaps due in part to low inventories of affordable housing. The progress in lowering inflation since April is a welcome development, but core inflation is still uncomfortably above the Committee's 2 percent goal. Prices remain much higher than before the pandemic, which continues to weigh on consumer sentiment. Higher prices have an outsized effect on lower- and moderate-income households, as these households devote a significantly larger share of income to food, energy, and housing. Prices for these spending categories have far outpaced overall inflation over the past few years. Economic growth moderated earlier this year after coming in stronger last year. Private domestic final purchases (PDFP) growth has been solid and slowed much less than gross domestic product (GDP), as the slowdown in GDP growth was partly driven by volatile categories including net exports, suggesting that underlying economic growth was stronger than GDP indicated. PDFP has continued to increase at a solid pace so far in the third quarter, despite some further weakening in housing activity, as retail sales have shown further robust gains in July and August. Although personal consumption has remained resilient, consumers appear to be pulling back on discretionary items and expenses, as evidenced in part by a decline in restaurant spending since late last year. Low- and moderate-income consumers no longer have extra savings to support this type of spending, and we have seen loan delinquency rates normalize from historically low levels during the pandemic. The most recent labor market report shows that payroll employment gains have slowed appreciably to a pace moderately above 100,000 per month over the three months ending in August. The unemployment rate edged down to 4.2 percent in August from 4.3 percent in July. While unemployment is notably higher than a year ago, it is still at a historically low level and below my and the Congressional Budget Office's estimates of full employment. The labor market has loosened from the extremely tight conditions of the past few years. The ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers has declined further to a touch below the historically elevated pre-pandemic level—a sign that the number of available workers and the number of available jobs have come into better balance. But there are still more available jobs than available workers, a condition that before 2018 has only occurred twice for a prolonged period since World War II, further signaling ongoing labor market strength despite the reported data. Although wage growth has slowed further in recent months, it remains indicative of a tight labor market. At just under 4 percent, as measured by both the employment cost index and average hourly earnings, wage gains are still above the pace consistent with our inflation goal given trend productivity growth. The rise in the unemployment rate this year largely reflects weaker hiring, as job seekers entering or re-entering the labor force are taking longer to find work, while layoffs remain low. In addition to some cooling in labor demand, there are other factors likely contributing the increased unemployment. A mismatch between the skills of the new workers and available jobs could further raise unemployment, suggesting that higher unemployment has been partly driven by the stronger supply of workers. It is also likely that some temporary factors contributed to the recent rise in the unemployment rate, as unemployment among working age teenagers sharply increased in August. Preference for a More Measured Recalibration of PolicyThe U.S. economy remains strong and core inflation remains uncomfortably above our 2 percent target. In light of these economic conditions, a few further considerations supported the case for a more measured approach in beginning the process to recalibrate our policy stance to remove restriction and move toward a more neutral setting. First, I was concerned that reducing the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point could be interpreted as a signal that the Committee sees some fragility or greater downside risks to the economy. In the current economic environment, with no clear signs of material weakening or fragility, in my view, beginning the rate-cutting cycle with a 1/4 percentage point move would have better reinforced the strength in economic conditions, while also confidently recognizing progress toward our goals. In my mind, a more measured approach would have avoided the risk of unintentionally signaling concerns about underlying economic conditions. Second, I was also concerned that reducing the policy rate by 1/2 percentage point could have led market participants to expect that the Committee would lower the target range by that same pace at future meetings until the policy rate approaches a neutral level. If this expectation had materialized, we could have seen an unwarranted decline in longer-term interest rates and broader financial conditions could become overly accommodative. This outcome could work against the Committee's goal of returning inflation to our 2 percent target. I am pleased that Chair Powell directly addressed both of these concerns during the press conference following last week's FOMC meeting. Third, there continues to be a considerable amount of pent-up demand and cash on the sidelines ready to be deployed as the path of interest rates moves down. Bringing the policy rate down too quickly carries the risk of unleashing that pent-up demand. A more measured approach would also avoid unnecessarily stoking demand and potentially reigniting inflationary pressures. Finally, in dialing back our restrictive stance of policy, we also need to be mindful of what the end point is likely to be. My estimate of the neutral rate is much higher than it was before the pandemic. Therefore, I think we are much closer to neutral than would have been the case under pre-pandemic conditions, and I did not see the peak stance of policy as restrictive to the same extent that my colleagues may have. With a higher estimate of neutral, for any given pace of rate reductions, we would arrive at our destination sooner. Ongoing Risks to the OutlookTurning to the risks to achieving our dual mandate, I continue to see greater risks to price stability, especially while the labor market continues to be near estimates of full employment. Although the labor market data have been showing signs of cooling in recent months, still-elevated wage growth, solid consumer spending, and resilient GDP growth are not consistent with a material economic weakening or fragility. My contacts also continue to mention that they are not planning layoffs and continue to have difficulty hiring. Therefore, I am taking less signal from the recent labor market data until there are clear trends indicating that both spending growth and the labor market have materially weakened. I suspect the recent immigration flows have and will continue to affect labor markets in ways that we do not yet fully understand and cannot yet accurately measure. In light of the dissonance created by conflicting economic signals, measurement challenges, and data revisions, I remain cautious about taking signal from only a limited set of real-time data releases. In my view, the upside risks to inflation remain prominent. Global supply chains continue to be susceptible to labor strikes and increased geopolitical tensions, which could result in inflationary effects on food, energy, and other commodity markets. Expansionary fiscal spending could also lead to inflationary risks, as could an increased demand for housing given the long-standing limited supply, especially of affordable housing. While it has not been my baseline outlook, I cannot rule out the risk that progress on inflation could continue to stall. Although it is important to recognize that there has been meaningful progress on lowering inflation, while core inflation remains around or above 2.5 percent, I see the risk that the Committee's larger policy action could be interpreted as a premature declaration of victory on our price-stability mandate. Accomplishing our mission of returning to low and stable inflation at our 2 percent goal is necessary to foster a strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone in the longer term. In light of these considerations, I believe that, by moving at a measured pace toward a more neutral policy stance, we will be better positioned to achieve further progress in bringing inflation down to our 2 percent target, while closely watching the evolution of labor market conditions. The Path ForwardDespite my dissent at the recent FOMC meeting, I respect and appreciate that my FOMC colleagues preferred to begin the reduction in the federal funds rate with a larger initial cut in the target range for the policy rate. I remain committed to working together with my colleagues to ensure that monetary policy is appropriately positioned to achieve our goals of attaining maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent target. I will continue to monitor the incoming data and information as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy, and I will remain cautious in my approach to adjusting the stance of policy going forward. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook guided by the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. We need to ensure that the public understands clearly how current and expected deviations of inflation and employment from our mandated goals inform our policy decisions. By the time of our next meeting in November, we will have received updated reports on inflation, employment, and economic activity. We may also have a better understanding of how developments in longer-term interest rates and broader financial conditions might influence the economic outlook. During the intermeeting period, I will continue to visit with a broad range of contacts to discuss economic conditions as I assess the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance. As I noted earlier, I continue to view inflation as a concern. In light of the upside risks that I just described, it remains necessary to pay close attention to the price-stability side of our mandate while being attentive to the risks of a material weakening in the labor market. My view continues to be that restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. However, should the data evolve in a way that points to a material weakening in the labor market, I would support taking action and adjust monetary policy as needed while taking into account our inflation mandate. Closing ThoughtsIn closing, thank you again for welcoming me here today. It is a pleasure to join you and to have the opportunity to discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy. And given the recent FOMC meeting decision and my dissent, I appreciate being able to provide a more detailed explanation of the reasoning that led me to dissent in favor of a smaller reduction in the policy rate at last week's FOMC meeting. I look forward to answering your questions and to engaging with your members on bank regulatory and supervisory matters. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman On Wednesday, September 18, 2024, I dissented from the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point to 4-3/4 to 5 percent. As the Committee's post-meeting statement notes, I preferred to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 5 to 5-1/4 percent. Given the progress we have seen since the middle of 2023 on both lowering inflation and cooling the labor market, I agree that at this meeting it was appropriate to recalibrate the level of the federal funds rate and begin the process of moving toward a more neutral policy stance. In my view, however, a smaller first move in this process would have been a preferable action. The U.S. Economy Remains StrongThe U.S. economy remains strong, with solid underlying growth in economic activity and a labor market near full employment. Although hiring appears to have softened, layoffs remain low. I see the normalization in labor market conditions as necessary to help bring wage growth down to a pace consistent with 2 percent inflation given trend productivity growth. My reading of labor market data has become more uncertain due to increased measurement challenges and the inherent difficulty in assessing the effects of recent immigration flows. I am also taking signal from continued solid growth in the spending data, especially consumer spending, reflecting a healthy labor market. Despite Progress, Inflation Remains a ConcernInflation remains above our 2 percent goal, as core personal consumption expenditures prices are still rising faster than 2.5 percent from 12 months earlier. Higher prices have an outsized impact on lower- and moderate-income households. Accomplishing our mission of returning to low and stable inflation at our 2 percent goal is necessary to foster a strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone in the longer term. Although it is important to recognize that there has been meaningful progress on lowering inflation, while core inflation remains around or above 2.5 percent, I see the risk that the Committee's larger policy action could be interpreted as a premature declaration of victory on our price stability mandate. We have not yet achieved our inflation goal. I believe that moving at a measured pace toward a more neutral policy stance will ensure further progress in bringing inflation down to our 2 percent target. This approach would also avoid unnecessarily stoking demand. Shared Goals for the FutureDespite my dissent at our recent meeting, I respect and appreciate that my colleagues preferred to begin the reduction in the federal funds rate with a larger initial reduction in the target range for the policy rate. I remain committed to working together with my colleagues to ensure that monetary policy is appropriately positioned to achieve our goals of maximum employment and returning inflation to our 2 percent target.
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the 2024 U.S. Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.1 It is great to be here again, particularly because this year marks the 10th annual conference on the Treasury market, a milestone that is worth celebrating. I want to acknowledge the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for its leadership in this area, including the dedication and excellence it has brought to hosting this conference over the past decade, in collaboration with the Inter-Agency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance, led by the Treasury Department. The Treasury market is the means by which our government meets its financing needs in service to the American people, and it is also the bedrock of the financial system. Promoting the resilience of the Treasury market and ensuring it can continue to fulfill these roles requires the collaboration of agencies and individuals across the government along with the private sector. As others have pointed out today, we have made important progress since last year's conference. The Securities and Exchange Commission has finalized a rule on central clearing of Treasury transactions, the Treasury Department has instituted a program for buying back less-liquid Treasury securities, and the Office of Financial Research is preparing for its permanent collection of data on non-centrally-cleared bilateral repurchase agreement (repo) transactions, which will support our understanding of this market segment as it evolves. I will share some thoughts with you on how I see the work of the Federal Reserve in supporting Treasury market resilience. Our capital and liquidity regulations, our supervision of the firms over which we have authority, and our liquidity facilities play important roles in supporting market resilience and financial stability. Earlier this month, I gave a speech where I reiterated the crucial role of capital in serving these objectives, and the need to balance resilience and efficiency in designing our rules. In that speech, I also outlined the elements of a capital re-proposal that I believe will have broad consensus at the Federal Reserve Board. The adjustments are in response to a robust public comment process, and some of them are designed to address interactions and market functioning concerns raised by commentators. In terms of rulemaking, today I will focus on some additional aspects of our regulatory framework—namely, enhancements to our liquidity regulations. I will share some perspective on how our liquidity regulations work together and are supportive of market functioning and the smooth implementation of monetary policy. The Intersection of Monetary Policy Tools and Supervision and RegulationWe consider how all of the Fed's tools work together to support our objectives. In previous speeches, I have talked about the role of the discount window and the standing repo facility (SRF) in supporting both monetary policy implementation and financial stability, noting how important it is that eligible institutions be ready to use these facilities.2Today I want to dig into this topic a bit more, including how these tools support monetary policy implementation through appropriate incorporation into liquidity regulations and supervisory practices. After the banking stress in March 2023, we saw a substantial improvement among banks of all sizes in their level of readiness to tap the discount window both in taking the necessary steps for set-up and in their pledging of collateral. Since that time, over $1 trillion in additional collateral has been pledged to the discount window, and additional banks have established access to the SRF. Both of these facilities are potential venues for monetizing assets and raising liquidity to address volatility in private funding market rates or gaps in the availability of private-market funding. We had been hearing that some were confused about how banks could incorporate ready access to the discount window and the SRF into their contingency funding plans and internal liquidity stress tests. Supervisors have a role in assessing the viability of large banks' plans to meet stressed outflows in their stress scenarios, and we have been asked whether the discount window, the SRF, and also Federal Home Loan Bank advances can play a role in those scenarios. The answer to this question is "yes." We provided clarity to the public in August on permissible assumptions for how firms can incorporate the discount window and the SRF into their internal liquidity stress-test scenarios. There are a couple of principles that underlie our response in the frequently asked questions we posted on the Board's website.3One principle is that our tools are readily available to firms. This means that we see it as acceptable and beneficial for firms to incorporate our facilities to meet liquidity needs in both planning and practice. If firms plan to use our facilities, we expect them to demonstrate ex ante that they are fully capable of doing so, including through test transactions. An additional principle underlying our approach is that, while firms should be ready to use a range of funding sources, firms need to hold sufficient highly liquid assets to meet their potential liquidity needs. That is, they need to self-insure against their own liquidity risks. A third principle is that firms should be ready and able to use private channels to turn these assets into cash, in addition to any public channels they may plan to use. I want to dig a bit deeper into the benefits to both individual firms and the financial system when firms incorporate Fed facilities into their stress preparedness planning. Again, a design feature of our liquidity regulations is that large banks mustself-insureagainstmajor liquidity risks. Our regulations also provide flexibility in terms of the portfolio composition such banks use to do so. This flexibility allows them to adjust their portfolios based on market conditions and firm needs. A key component of this flexibility is that reserves and certain high-quality liquid assets (HQLA), such as Treasury securities, are equivalent in terms of being treated as the highest quality of liquid assets. This feature is important because, while it allows firms to manage their liquidity buffers more flexibly, it also allows for greater flexibility in our monetary policy implementation and it supports market functioning. We have heard over the years, however, that the degree of substitutability among these assets has been limited by concerns about capacity in stress for the market to turn securities into reserves immediately; these concerns are valid. This constraint can be addressed in part by the appropriate incorporation of Federal Reserve facilities into monetization plans in firms' internal liquidity stress tests. When firms understand that they will not be fully constrained by the capacity of private markets or their individual credit lines to monetize HQLA immediately in stress, they can reduce their demand for reserves in favor of Treasury securities, all else being equal, for their stress planning purposes. This dynamic improves the substitutability of holding reserves and holding Treasury securities either outright or through repo transactions. When banks exhibit a high degree of substitutability of demand for these assets, money market functioning improves. Let me explain with an example. If a bank sees holding reserves and investing in Treasury repo as near substitutes in its liquidity portfolio, it should lend into Treasury repo markets when repo rates rise above the interest rate earned on reserves. When banks can nimbly adjust portfolios in response to price incentives, the efficiency of reserves redistribution through the system improves, and market functioning is enhanced. In aggregate, this activity can prevent rates from rising further, all else being equal. The point at which banks, in aggregate, have a relatively immutable demand for reserves, and are unwilling to lend them out, is evident when a small decrease in the supply of reserves results in a sharp increase in the cost to borrow them. Our monetary policy tools are well positioned to help us avoid this outcome. But, of course, greater willingness of banks to reallocate across close substitutes should help avoid the emergence of sudden pressures in money markets by reducing money market frictions. In 2021, the Federal Reserve launched the SRF, which, along with the discount window, should help cap upward pressure in repo markets that could spill over into the federal funds market. Use of these facilities also increases the supply of reserves in the system. The enhanced clarity for firms that Fed facilities are a fully acceptable venue to get same-day liquidity for their HQLA should help reassure firms about holding reserves and their close substitutes, such as Treasury securities, in their liquidity portfolios. Of course, as I stated earlier, for the largest banks, there is a requirement that they hold highly liquid assets to address their own liquidity risks. They must also be ready to use private markets to monetize these assets. It is also critical that banks recognize and manage the interest rate and liquidity risk of their securities portfolios to ensure those securities held for liquidity purposes can be monetized in stress without creating other adverse effects on a firm's safety and soundness. In 2022 and 2023, certain large banks did not effectively manage the risks of rising rates, and suffered significant fair value losses on their securities holdings, including those in held-to-maturity (HTM) portfolios. These losses affected their ability to respond to liquidity stress, as monetizing the assets could result in realizing losses. When the banking stress hit in March 2023, these securities could not be sold to meet stressed outflows because large unrealized losses inhibited their sale without significant capital implications. This is further complicated in the case of HTM securities, which cannot be sold without risking revaluing a firm's entire HTM portfolio. Selling HTM securities to generate liquidity would therefore have had a particularly large effect on these firms' capital levels, likely increasing the stress on these firms. Further, some firms were unable to rely on private channels such as repo markets for monetization because they were not prepared, they were not regular participants in the market, and market participants were unwilling to lend because of counterparty credit concerns. This combination of factors meant that HTM securities that had been identified by banks as available to serve as a liquidity buffer of assets in stress could not effectively serve that function. Improvements to Our Liquidity RegulationsAs I have mentioned in previous speeches, to address the lessons about liquidity learned in the spring of 2023, we are exploring targeted adjustments to our current liquidity framework.4Many firms have taken steps to improve their liquidity resilience, and the regulatory adjustments we are considering would ensure that large banks maintain better liquidity risk–management practices going forward. Improvements to our liquidity regulations will also complement the other components of our supervisory and regulatory regime by improving banks' ability to respond to funding shocks. Specifically, we are exploring a requirement that larger banks maintain a minimum amount of readily available liquidity with a pool of reserves and pre-positioned collateral at the discount window, based on a fraction of their uninsured deposits. Community banks would not be covered, and we would take a tiered approach to the requirements. The collateral pre-positioned at the window could include both Treasury securities and the full range of assets eligible for pledging at the discount window. It is vital that uninsured depositors have confidence that their funds will be readily available for withdrawal, if needed, and this confidence would be enhanced by a requirement that larger banks have readily available liquidity to meet requests for withdrawal of these deposits. This requirement would be a complement to existing liquidity regulations such as those that require the internal liquidity stress tests (ILST) I described earlier as well as meeting the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR).5 Incorporating the discount window into a readiness requirement would also reemphasize that supervisors and examiners view use of the discount window as appropriate under both normal and stressed market conditions. In addition, as I have discussed previously, we identified significant gaps in interest rate risk management in the March 2023 banking stress, including in portfolios of highly liquid securities. Relatedly, we saw that banks faced constraints in monetizing HTM assets with large unrealized losses in private markets because they were unable to repo these securities or sell these securities without realizing significant losses. To address these gaps, we are considering a partial limit on the extent of reliance on HTM assets in larger banks' liquidity buffers, such as those held under the LCR and ILST requirements. These adjustments would address the known challenges of banks being able to use these assets in stress conditions. Finally, we are reviewing the treatment of a handful of types of deposits in the current liquidity framework. Observed behavior of different deposit types during times of stress suggests the need to recalibrate deposit outflow assumptions in our rules for certain types of depositors. We are also revisiting the scope of application of our current liquidity framework for large banks. These enhancements to our liquidity regulations will help bolster firms' ability to manage liquidity shocks, and they will also be well integrated with our monetary policy tools and framework. Modernizing Our Tools to Meet Current and Future NeedsTurning back to the discount window, I also want to note that the discount window has served its role well in recent years, and that we are also engaging in ongoing work to improve its operations. Given the crucial role of the discount window in providing ready access to liquidity in a wide variety of market conditions, we continuously work to assess and improve its functionality while engaging with current and potential users of the window. Among the steps we have taken recently include that we now have an online portal, Discount Window Direct, that allows firms to request and prepay discount window loans in a more streamlined manner than was previously possible. We also recently published a request for information on discount window operations and daylight credit asking about key components of these functions. Feedback from the public will help us prioritize areas for improvement, so I strongly encourage anyone with an interest in this topic to weigh in during the comment period. Your feedback will help us ensure that the discount window continues to improve in its role of providing ready access to funding under a variety of market conditions. Thank you. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Michael S. Barr (2023),"The 2023 U.S. Treasury Market Conference,"speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, November 16.Return to text 3. See "Subparts D and O—Enhanced Prudential Standards" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024),"Frequently Asked Questions about Regulation YY,"webpage.Return to text 4. See Michael S. Barr (2024),"On Building a Resilient Regulatory Framework,"speech delivered at Central Banking in the Post-Pandemic Financial System, 28th Annual Financial Markets Conference, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Fernandina Beach, Fla., May 20.Return to text 5. The LCR and ILST are two separate, but complementary, liquidity requirements. The LCR is a standardized liquidity measure across banks, meaning the outflow assumptions are the same for each bank. The ILST is a nonstandardized liquidity measure across banks, meaning each bank determines its own outflow assumptions, subject to supervisory input.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Executive Council of the Banking Law Section of the Federal Bar Association, Washington, D.C Thank you for the invitation to join you.1Given the recent conclusion of the Board's stress test, it seems timely to share my thoughts on the stress testing program. In the past, I have noted reservations about the stress testing process, so today I'd like to discuss in greater detail the benefits, challenges, and issues I would like to see resolved as the stress testing program evolves in the future.2 Earlier this summer, the Board announced the results of the supervisory stress tests. At a high level, all 31 banks subject to the test remained above their minimum common equity tier one (CET1) capital requirements from the hypothetical recession scenario.3Under this scenario, banks would have absorbed projected hypothetical losses of nearly $685 billion, and would have experienced an aggregate CET1 capital decline of 2.8 percent.4The hypothetical scenario included a 40 percent decline in commercial real estate prices, a substantial increase in office vacancies, a 36 percent decline in house prices, a spike in unemployment to a peak of 10 percent, and related declines in economic output.5This year also saw the introduction of "exploratory" stress scenarios, which included two different funding stress scenarios, and for a subset of banks, included two trading book loss scenarios.6The Board's press release announcing the results reported that large banks are well positioned to weather a severe recession and remain above minimum capital requirements.7 More recently, the Fed announced the final individual capital requirements for all large banks, effective on October 1, 2024.8The firm-specific capital requirements are "informed by" the stress test results, and include a 4.5 percent minimum capital requirement, a stress capital buffer that is set at a minimum of 2.5 percent, and if applicable, a capital surcharge for the most complex banks that is based on each firm's systemic risk.9The announcement of this year's results also noted the modification of the stress capital buffer for a single firm based on a reconsideration request. While firms subject to the stress test have long had the ability to request reconsideration—and many have done so in the past—this was notable as it was the first time that a reconsideration request was successful in producing a change to a firm's stress capital buffer. As we conclude this most recent cycle of stress testing—and as many firms begin to turn to the next round—I think it is helpful to pause and consider whether and how the process could be improved. My remarks today will address the value of stress testing on bank safety and soundness and on financial stability, my concerns about the current implementation of the stress test, and finally what I see as a potential path forward. I hope this discussion leads to a broader consideration of stress testing, its role in the current prudential framework as a supervisory tool, and as a mechanism to set large bank capital standards through the stress capital buffer. The Value of Stress TestingLet me start by emphasizing that my remarks today should not be interpreted as a wholesale criticism of the stress testing process and framework. I firmly believe that stress testing is and will remain a valuable mechanism that provides insights that can inform supervision and can inform the public about how the largest and most complex banks would fare under a severe stress scenario. This exercise helps us gauge a bank's capital position and determine whether it has sufficient capital to absorb losses and continue lending during an economic stress event. In practice, stress testing provides a very granular assessment of a firm's risk, one that is more refined and risk-sensitive than capital standards alone. It relies on detailed balance sheet information—fixed at a particular date in the past—to do a deeper analysis of the firm's financial condition at that point in time. By subjecting this balance sheet to a hypothetical shock, we develop a better sense of not only the firm's risk, but also the firm's capacity to respond and adapt to changing economic conditions. This type of analysis would be impractical to conduct on a continuous basis, but it is a useful periodic supplement to ongoing capital requirements and can be used to support more robust supervisory practices. The Need for ReformWhile there are many virtues of stress testing, as currently implemented and executed there are several significant drawbacks. These drawbacks arguably make the process less fair, transparent, and useful than it could and should be. I have long supported and argued in favor of fairness and transparency in the bank regulatory framework.10The rules and supervisory practices that comprise this framework should be consistent among firms, and consistent over time. Banks should have a clear understanding of these rules to allow them to make informed business decisions that consider the impact of the regulatory framework. But we also know that the diversity and variability of bank business models can present a challenge to the clarity of the framework. Clarity is needed both to promote equitable treatment among banks with different business models, and to create rules that are fair over time. This allows firms to anticipate regulatory expectations as their business activities and balance sheets evolve in response to, among other things, changing economic conditions. Each bank is unique, and one need look no further than the balance sheets, business activities, and risk profiles of large banks to observe this variability. But the onus is on regulators to ensure that over time, regulations and supervisory practices are applied fairly and consistently, and that evolution in the framework is accompanied by appropriate transparency for regulated entities. The challenge of creating rules that are fair and transparent is nowhere more notable than in stress testing. Stress testing serves an important role in our regulatory framework, but one that requires evolution to ensure relevancy and effectiveness. To date, the evolution of stress testing has focused on refining the tests to be more robust over time and to provide more granular risk information about these banks. While these incremental improvements have been helpful, the task of addressing identified problems is equally important. To be clear, these problems extend beyond model accuracy and consistency across firms. While by no means a comprehensive list, I would like to address four of my concerns in particular: (1) volatility in firm results from year to year, (2) the challenge of linking stress testing outcomes with capital through the stress capital buffer, (3) the broad lack of transparency, and (4) the overlap with other capital requirements like the overlap between the global market shock in stress testing and the market risk rule under the Basel III endgame proposal. VolatilityOne area of particular concern is the year-over-year volatility in stress testing results. Many of the stress test design features are intended to promote consistency across firms—the exercise uses a common scenario design, and subjects similarly situated firms to stress testing at the same frequency. This format allows for comparisons across firms and can provide important supervisory insights as regulators can look across firms to find common risk factors that could affect multiple firms—and lead to more significant and widespread economic impacts—in a stress event. But we have seen that stress test results for several firms vary considerably from year to year based on the interaction of the specific scenario being tested with a firm's business model, changes to the model, and each firm's balance sheet. This variability then flows through to the stress capital buffers that apply to the largest firms.11 Some variability is to be expected as the risk factors and balance sheet composition of the tested firms both change over time. However, the test results observed year over year often produce results that are not predictable in advance—for example, some of the volatility we see is not based on fundamental changes to a tested bank's business model. The link between stress testing and capital also creates a practical timing issue for firms. The time frame for compliance with stress capital buffers compounds the issue of excessive year-over-year volatility. While many capital requirements give firms a runway to comply and adjust capital planning projections going forward, stress capital buffers allow a very brief window of time for firms to comply.12As a real-time example, this year's preliminary stress capital buffer requirements were announced in late June, with required compliance by October 1st. This concern is experienced differently across firms—for example, some firms can likely predict that they will be subject to the stress capital buffer "floor," which perhaps can help with longer-term capital planning. But for those firms whose stress capital buffers exceed the floor, this short turnaround can pose significant planning challenges. Although banks historically have not been required to raise capital to meet higher stress capital buffer results, volatility is not a nonissue. As a matter of practice, banks maintain management buffers—additional capital in excess of capital and regulatory buffer requirements—to ensure that they operate at levels significantly above the "well-capitalized" threshold. Unexpectedly steep increases in stress capital buffers may force firms to recalibrate or reconsider their management buffer, perhaps operating at a higher level than would otherwise be necessary to account for known volatility in stress capital buffers over time. This variability is not without cost. Firms engage in capital planning over a long-term planning horizon. Significant variability can disrupt these practices and require firms to hold more capital and higher capital management buffers than prudent business practices would indicate. The link between stress testing and capital—the stress capital bufferAs currently implemented, the stress test exercise presents a single hypothetical shock to a firm's balance sheet, with the goal of better understanding firm performance and risks in the face of this stress. But the test is not intended to be—nor is it in practice—predictiveof an actual stress event that the firm would experience. During the banking stress of 2023, the key risk factor was rapidly rising interest rates, and yet this type of economic stressor was not included in any past iteration of the test design. Why do we select one scenario and use that hypothetical to establish binding capital requirements for many firms regardless of their business model? What incentives does this system create as regulators design scenarios? Unquestionably, stress testing can provide valuable insights to inform supervision. Testing multiple stress scenarios could provide additional information that could be used to probe the unique risks and resilience of particular firms. And it could provide regulators and the public with a clearer understanding of financial stability risks across firms under different plausible future states of the world. But a more robust use of stress testing would require rationalizing the link between stress testing and capital to ensure that any change in overall calibration was driven by an intentional process that results in a reasonable policy outcome. As a practical matter, testing additional scenarios raises the question of what consequences should flow from a multi-scenario testing regime. Would such an approachrequireacross-the-board capital increases, as regulators calibrate stress capital buffers based on the most severe outcome of any tested scenario for each firm? Or should regulators pick a common scenario to calibrate stress capital buffers for all firms, even in a multi-scenario stress testing regime? Or should regulators take a different approach and sever the link between stress testing and capital requirements? The link between stress testing and capital raises important policy questions about the optimal level of capital, but ultimately should not dissuade us from using stress testing to better understand firm-specific and broader financial stability risks. At the same time, we need to pay careful attention to the design of all capital requirements—including not just the stress capital buffer, but also other risk-based capital requirements, leverage requirements, and long-term debt requirements—to ensure that the overall calibration of these requirements is proportionate to risk. In my view, an up-calibration of capital requirements through an expanded scenario-testing regime would not be supportable based on the underlying risks. TransparencyOne persistent issue with the stress tests is the lack of public transparency around the models. This opacity frustrates bank capital management and allocation. When a bank engages in an activity or prices a product or service, as a sound business practice, they must anticipate the financial consequences and the accompanying risks. Before making any decisions, a bank will often try to project the anticipated costs and revenues. In addition, the bank will want to evaluate the projected growth of the business or activity over time, determine whether the activity complements other existing products and services, and decide whether there will be sufficient customer demand to justify the cost based on the contemplated pricing levels and margins. One important consideration in this exercise is the cost of capital. Banks often quantify the cost of capital and "allocate" those costs across various business lines. The capital requirements and supervisory risk assessment of activities are important inputs for bank decision-making. Banks benefit when they understand the regulatory perception of their activities. That feedback is often a critical part of the supervisory process. A regulatory perspective is embedded in stress testing, through the common parameters, assumptions, and conditions that will be used in the exercises. But much of this work remains hidden from public scrutiny and from the financial institutions subject to the stress tests. Providing access to this information—making clear the regulatory perspective—by improving the transparency of the process would enable banks to better manage their business and make more informed decisions. Of course, greater disclosure is not without its detractors. A common criticism of increased transparency is that disclosing the more granular parameters of particular calculations would lead to "gaming" of the test by large banks seeking to optimize their capital. The underlying premise of this concern seems to be that the stress tests are and must be static over time, and that if firms make changes to their activities that have no economic consequences—but instead are used only for "gaming" purposes to reduce stress losses—that regulators are limited in making further changes. I think this misinterprets the dynamism and review that should complement the stress testing process. Greater disclosure and transparency should be accompanied by a careful review of how firms incorporate and use any additional information, and to the extent that gaming activity is identified, further changes to the test design may be appropriate. Another criticism is that by disclosing test results, all firms—including in their internal stress testing practices—will "converge" on a common standard and that this standard will in some way increase risk. For example, if firms' stress testing practices are uniform, but include some flawed assumption or parameter, this could create a systemic weakness. Put differently, the model "monoculture" caused by greater transparency could miss important systemic risks. We should ask whether more granular disclosures would override the informed risk assessments of banks in managing their business—would all firms simply adopt whatever the regulators are doing in the supervisory stress test, undermining the utility of other practices like internal stress tests? However, we should not think about stress testing in isolation—supervision informed by stress testing, and ongoing improvements to supervisory stress testing can operate as a backstop to address risks that may accompany more transparency. I am concerned about changes that could undermine the utility of both regulatory and internal stress testing at large firms. Regulators should not seek to take risk-management decisions away from banks. But greater transparency, debate, and discussion of test parameters need not lead to a dilution of standards. These discussions could actually promote a cycle of continuous improvement and feedback. We have seen over time that the regulatory stress tests are not static. As regulators learn more, they adjust and adapt different elements of the exercise in light of lessons learned from the process. The issues of transparency around the stress tests extend beyond just disclosure. The reconsideration process itself could be improved by developing a more transparent process and clearer standards against which reconsideration requests will be evaluated. While this year saw a positive development with the Board for the first time changing a firm's stress capital buffer requirement in response to a request for reconsideration, the high failure rate of such requests over time shows the need for rethinking and revisiting the process. Overlap with other capital requirementsFinally, as I have noted in the past, we must ensure that each element of the capital framework operates in a complementary and not contradictory way, and that requirements are calibrated proportionate to risks. Failing to appropriately calibrate capital and risk requirements creates risks—incentivizing banks to curtail activities that are assigned a punitive capital treatment and devoting more resources to activities that are assigned an inappropriately low capital risk weighting. Over time, these dynamics can have real-world market and economic consequences, resulting in negative outcomes for customers and economic activity. When we view capital requirements in their totality, one potential overlap can be found in the proposed changes to the market risk capital rules and operational risk rules with the "global market shock" and operational risk elements of the supervisory stress testing framework. We need to ensure that the risks captured and methodologies underpinning these distinct requirements do not lead to an over-calibration of capital requirements for activities that support the important role of U.S. capital markets in the global economy. The Path ForwardAs we look ahead to the future of stress testing, I think we need to carefully consider how the current framework can be improved. These issues—volatility, the link between stress testing results and capital and the short capital implementation compliance time frame, the lack of transparency, and the overlap between the global market shock in stress testing with the market risk test of Basel III—can all be addressed and should be prioritized in the ongoing evolution of the stress testing framework and stress capital buffer requirements. It is important that regulators consider the lessons learned from past tests and feedback from banks and other members of the public to ensure that stress testing is fair, transparent, and more useful going forward. First, we need to address the excessive year-over-year volatility, which flows through to the calculation of stress capital buffers. As I noted, capital planning for many firms is a long-term enterprise, and excessive volatility and unpredictability of stress capital buffer levels can increase costs and complicate capital allocation and management. Of course, the goal is not to eliminate variability over time—variability based on changing economic conditions and changing firm business activities and balance sheets—but rather to blunt the excessive volatility observed over the history of stress testing. There are many possible ways to limit excessive volatility while maintaining the value of the Board's stress tests. For example, one solution could be to average results over multiple years, so a firm's stress capital buffer would move in smaller increments through the averaging process. Another possibility is to constrain variability in annual stress test scenario design. Countercyclicality in the design of the regulatory stress tests—where the stress experienced by firms is more severe when economic conditions are better—acts as a counterweight to the inherent procyclicality of risk models. This approach "eases" capital requirements (through lower stress capital buffers) as economic conditions decline. But this countercyclicality is also a driver of volatility, and we should look more closely as to whether our attempts to adjust for countercyclicality are appropriate through the lens of stress test volatility. Second, I think there is a benefit to promoting greater transparency in stress testing, particularly as it relates to the disclosure of the underlying models. Stress testing need not be an exercise shrouded in secrecy, and the Federal Reserve has shown in the past that improvements are possible. For example, in 2019, the Board adopted new principles that guide the design of the stress tests, and promoted greater transparency.13In addition to these principles, the Board moved to provide more information about its stress testing models, including ranges of loss rates for actual loans held, portfolios of hypothetical loans with loss rates estimated by the Board's models, and more detailed descriptions of the Board's models (including some granular information about certain equations and variables used in the models).14While these were positive steps in promoting transparency, the announcement of design principles and enhanced disclosures did not go far enough in my view, and we have seen that even after several years, firms continue to struggle to understand and anticipate the results of supervisory stress tests and the accompanying stress capital buffer requirements. The simple solution here seems to be disclosure of more granular information about all of the models used in stress testing. In my view, disclosure of these models—and even subjecting the models to appropriate notice and comment processes and public feedback—would not undermine the goal of the stress tests of having a regulator-created model that is separate and distinct from the internal models used by firms. Regulators would still control the contours and content of the models but would have the benefit of public feedback. If we believe in the validity and reasonableness of our model design choices, we should not shy away from public feedback. Third, we should adjust the compliance framework for stress capital buffers. Firms should not be forced to comply with higher capital requirements after only a few months' notice but should have a reasonable time frame for compliance. I would note that a longer compliance runway is particularly important in a world in which testing is opaque and volatility continues to be excessive. To the extent that these more fundamental issues are addressed, this may mitigate the need for a shorter compliance window. Finally, as we move forward with Basel III implementation, we need to take a careful look at whether market risk and operational risk requirements are overlapping and redundant with the "global market shock" and operational risk elements of stress testing and think about the calibration of these requirements in the aggregate. Would these tests in tandem produce excessively calibrated capital requirements, and if so, what would the impact be on U.S. capital markets? In my view, there are strong indications that as currently formulated, the combination of these requirements would result in an excessive calibration of risk-weighted assets for market making and trading activities. And of course, we must think broadly about the optimal level of capital in the banking system, taking into account the full range of risk-based and leverage capital requirements and long-term debt requirements. There are many possible ways to move forward with stress testing, and the proposals I have offered above are merely a subset of possible changes that could improve the process and address many of the known deficiencies. But I believe there is a growing awareness of the need for a fundamental rethink and strategic reform of stress testing, and any such process must acknowledge and address these known issues within the framework.15 Closing ThoughtsThank you again for the invitation to join you today. The stress test is an important supervisory tool, and I think it is imperative that we work to continually improve it. I have laid out a number of my concerns about the current practice, and some potential areas to explore in terms of improvement. But I also think it is imperative to listen to a wide range of stakeholders about the path forward. 1. These remarks represent my own views and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Michelle W. Bowman, "Large Bank Supervision and Regulation (PDF)" (remarks at the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C., September 30, 2022); andStatement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman on the Basel III Endgame Proposal(July 27, 2023), ("Today's proposal is intended to improve risk capture, but in some circumstances, leaves in place and even introduces new regulatory redundancies, as with changes to the market risk capital rule, credit valuation adjustments, and operational risk that overlap with stress testing requirements and the stress capital buffer").Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Annual Bank Stress Test Showed That While Large Banks Would Endure Greater Losses Than Last Year's Test, They Are Well Positioned to Weather a Severe Recession and Stay Above Minimum Capital Requirements," news release, June 26, 2024.Return to text 4. Id.Return to text 5. Id.Return to text 6. Id.Return to text 7. Id.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Announces Final Individual Capital Requirements for All Large Banks, Effective on October 1," news release, August 28, 2024.Return to text 9. Id.Return to text 10. See, e.g., Michelle W. Bowman, "My Perspective on Bank Regulation and Supervision (PDF)," (remarks to the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, February 16, 2021); Michelle W. Bowman, "Large Bank Supervision and Regulation (PDF)," (remarks at the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C., September 30, 2022); and Michelle W. Bowman, "Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision (PDF)," (remarks to the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, Orlando, FL, February 13, 2023).Return to text 11. From 2020–2024, six firms were subject to the stress capital buffer “floor” of 2.5 percent, while other firms above the floor have seen significantly greater volatility. While the operation of the stress capital buffer floor has reduced volatility for these six firms and several others that have been subject to the floor at some point in time, this set of firms also has been subject to a higher stress capital buffer charge than would have been indicated by the results of the stress test. More than half of all firms subject to the stress test from 2020–2024 have experienced a change in their applicable stress capital buffer of at least 1 percent over time. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Annual Large Bank Capital Requirements".Return to text 12. See 12 CFR § 225.8(h)(4); 12 CFR § 238.170(h)(4).Return to text 13. "Stress Testing Policy Statement (PDF)," 84 Fed. Reg. 6664 (February 28, 2019).Return to text 14. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Set of Changes That Will Increase the Transparency of Its Stress Testing Program for Nation's Largest and Most Complex Banks," news release, February 5, 2019.Return to text 15. See Daniel K. Tarullo, "Reconsidering the Regulatory Uses of Stress Testing (PDF)," Hutchins Center Working Paper #92 (May 2024).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Thank you for inviting me to speak today.1Since I joined the Federal Reserve Board as Vice Chair for Supervision, I have spoken many times about the importance of bank capital to the safety and soundness of banks and the stability of the financial system.2It is critical that banks have the capacity to continue lending to households and businesses through times of stress. Bank capital is a key component of this resilience. And bank capital rules help to ensure that banks are holding capital commensurate with the risks of their activities and the risks that they pose to the U.S. financial system. But capital has costs too. As compared to debt, capital is a more expensive source of funding to the bank.3Thus, higher capital requirements can raise the cost of funding to a bank, and the bank can pass higher costs on to households, businesses, and clients engaged in a range of financial activities. These activities are critical to a well-functioning economy that works for everyone. That's why it is important to get the balance between resiliency and efficiency right. Today, I'll return to these themes in the context of two rules of great public interest: The Basel III endgame proposal and the proposal to adjust the capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIB).4 The path forwardA little over a year ago, the Board sought comment on those two proposed rules, which would modify risk-based capital requirements for large banks. We received a great number of comments on the provisions in the proposal, as well as on the justifications and analysis that underlie those provisions. Since that time, we have been hard at work analyzing the comments and the data we collected to evaluate the combined impact of these proposals. We have spoken with a wide range of stakeholders, including banks, academics, public interest groups, consumers, businesses, other regulators, Congress, and others. As you would expect in a project as technical and consequential as this one, I have had many productive meetings with Board colleagues and our fellow federal bank regulatory agencies, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). This process has led us to conclude that broad and material changes to the proposals are warranted. As I said, there are benefits and costs to increasing capital requirements. The changes we intend to make will bring these two important objectives into better balance, in light of the feedback we have received. The changes to the endgame proposal have been a joint effort with my counterparts at the FDIC and the OCC. I intend to recommend that the Board re-propose the Basel endgame and G-SIB surcharge rules. This will provide the public the opportunity to fully review a number of key broad and material changes to the original proposals and provide comment. We will accept public comments on any aspect of the Basel endgame and G-SIB surcharge proposals. The changes in the endgame re-proposal will cover all major areas of the rule: credit risk; operational risk; and market risk. Banks with assets between $100 and $250 billion would no longer be subject to the endgame changes, other than the requirement to recognize unrealized gains and losses of their securities in regulatory capital.5These changes reflect the feedback we have received from the public, improve the tiering of the proposal, and better reflect risks. I will also recommend changes to the G-SIB surcharge proposal to better align the capital surcharge for a G-SIB with its systemic risk profile. Taken together, the re-proposals would increase aggregate common equity tier 1 capital requirements for the G-SIBs, which are the largest and most complex banks, by 9 percent. For other large banks that are not G-SIBs, the impact from the re-proposal would mainly result from the inclusion of unrealized gain and losses on their securities in regulatory capital, estimated to be equivalent to a 3 to 4 percent increase in capital requirements over the long run. The remainder of the re-proposal would increase capital requirements for non-GSIB firms still subject to the rule by 0.5 percent. While these proposed changes affect some of the most important aspects of the proposals, the agencies have not made final decisions on any aspect of the re-proposals, including those that are not explicitly addressed in the re-proposal. The public should not view any omission of a potential change in these re-proposals as an indication that the agencies will finalize a provision as proposed. We continue to consider comments already received on the 2023 proposal, and we will consider those comments together with any comments submitted on the re-proposals as part of any final rulemakings. This is an interim step. Let me reiterate that we are open to comments on any aspect of the proposals. Now, I will turn to the changes. Credit riskI will begin with an overview of the changes I will recommend to the capital requirements for credit risk, which protect against the risk that a bank's loans will not be fully repaid. These changes include reducing the risk-weights for residential real estate and retail exposures, extending the scope of the reduced risk weight for certain low-risk corporate debt, and eliminating the minimum haircut for securities financing transactions. First, I intend to recommend that the Board lower the proposed risk-weighting for loans secured by residential real estate and loans to retail customers. The original proposal introduced more risk-sensitive approaches for residential real estate and retail exposures, but calibrated them to be higher than the Basel standard to promote domestic competitive equity. The agencies received significant comments on the proposed calibrations. Some commenters argued that the elevated risk weights would overstate the risk for these loans given their loss history. Others argued that the risk weighting would affect home affordability and homeownership opportunities, particularly for first-time homebuyers, minority communities, and low- and moderate-income borrowers, and could reduce the availability and affordability of retail credit. I will recommend that we reduce the calibration for residential real estate exposures so that it is in line with the calibration developed in the Basel process. With this change, all-in capital requirements, including for operational and credit risk, will be lower on average than they are currently for mortgages up to 90 percent loan-to-value ratio, and about the same as they are now for mortgages up to 100 percent loan-to-value. With respect to loans to retail customers, I intend to recommend that we adopt the Basel standard, with two exceptions – first, we would lower the capital requirements for credit card exposures where the borrower uses only a small portion of the commitment line, and second, we would lower the capital requirement for charge cards with no pre-set credit limits. The second proposed change related to credit risk would extend the reduced risk weight for low-risk corporate exposures to certain regulated entities that a bank judges to be investment grade and that are not publicly traded. The original proposal provided this preferential treatment only to investment-grade corporates that were publicly traded because the financial disclosure requirements for these entities facilitate market participants' assessments of their financial condition, which in turn provide additional information for banking organizations to use when assessing these entities' credit risk. There were many comments that the preferential treatment should be extended further, including to regulated entities that are also subject to substantial regulatory discipline and substantial transparency requirements. Consistent with our objective of increasing risk sensitivity in capital requirements, I plan to recommend to the Board that we extend the reduced corporate risk weight to regulated entities – including regulated financial institutions that are not banks, such as pension funds, certain mutual funds, and foreign equivalents – that are investment-grade but not publicly traded. Third, I intend to recommend that the Board not adopt the capital treatment associated with minimum haircut floors for securities financing transactions. The proposal included heightened capital requirements for repo-style transactions and eligible margin loans that did not meet minimum margin requirements. While consistent with the Basel standard, several other major jurisdictions have not adopted this approach. Not adopting the minimum haircut floors will allow time to seek greater international consensus on this important topic before deciding on whether and how to implement such an approach in the United States. Equity ExposuresLet me speak to the treatment of tax credit equity financing exposures. I plan to recommend that we significantly lower the risk weight for tax credit equity funding structures, given the lower inherent risk in these structures compared to many other equity investments. The revised lower risk weight for these exposures of 100 percent would reflect this lower risk and be consistent with the approach we take for other tax credit investments, such as the low-income housing tax credits. Operational riskNext, let me speak about three changes I intend to recommend for the proposed capital treatment of operational risk, which is the risk of losses from inadequate or failed processes, such as from fraud or cyberattacks. First, I plan to recommend that we no longer adjust a firm's operational risk charge based on its operational loss history. This change will reduce fluctuations in a bank's operational risk capital requirements over time. Second, I plan to recommend to the Board that we calculate fee income on a net basis in calculating its contribution to the operational risk capital requirement. The original proposal would have measured the contribution of fee-based activities based on gross revenues, instead of net income, which is revenues minus expenses. Moving to net income for fee-based activities—specifically, by netting noninterest income and expenses (except for operational losses)—would produce more consistency in how operational risk is measured across bank activities, as interest and trading income and expenses are already measured on a net basis under the proposal. This change would also produce more consistent operational risk capital requirements across banks because the approach is less sensitive to the differences in accounting practices across banks. Third, I plan to recommend to the Board that we reduce operational risk capital requirements for investment management activities to reflect the smaller historical operational losses for these activities relative to income. The agencies received comments suggesting that some fee-based business lines have incurred meaningfully lower operational losses than other business lines. We have found evidence that investment management has historically experienced noticeably low operational losses relative to income produced. Market risk and derivativesNow, I'll speak to the capital treatment for a bank's trading activities and its derivatives activities. The endgame proposal included a number of important improvements relative to the current market risk capital framework, including to incorporate lessons learned from the 2007-09 financial crisis that have not been sufficiently addressed in the current framework. It would permit firms to use internal models to capture the complex dynamics of most market risks but would put certain constraints on banks' models and provide fallbacks in areas where modeling practices are not adequate. We received numerous comments on ways to improve this part of the proposal. I plan to recommend that we make changes to facilitate banks' ability to use internal models for market risk. For example, the re-proposal will introduce a multiyear implementation period for the profit and loss attribution tests that are used to confirm that models are working as intended. This extended transition period would allow banks to gain experience with the tests and provide time to improve their systems and processes and address any potential gaps in data and model performance. In addition, the re-proposal would contain a few additional adjustments to improve incentives for a firm to model its exposures. Moreover, we will clarify that uniform mortgage-backed securities positions would be treated as having a single obligor, regardless of whether they were issued by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae. This change will enable firms to recognize hedging across these securities. With respect to derivatives activities, I plan to recommend that the Board adjust the capital treatment for client-cleared derivatives activities by reducing the capital required for the client-facing leg of a client-cleared derivative. This change would better reflect the risks of these transactions, which are highly collateralized and subject to netting and daily margin requirements. This also would avoid disincentives to client clearing, which I'll return to later. TieringLet me turn to tiering. The largest, most complex firms should be subject to the most stringent requirements, in light of the costs that their potential failure would impose on the broader financial system and thus on businesses and households. Under the re-proposal, G-SIBs and other internationally active banks would be subject to the most stringent set of requirements, including the new credit risk and operational risk requirements, and the revised frameworks for market risk and CVA frameworks. Capital requirements for large banks that are not G-SIBs can be simpler while still supporting resilience. I am recommending a number of changes to better reflect this principle. For firms with assets between $250 and $700 billion that are not G-SIBs or internationally active, the re-proposal would apply the new credit risk and operational risk requirements; however, it would apply the frameworks for market risk and CVA frameworks only to firms that engage in significant trading activity. Further, the re-proposal would revert to the simpler definition of capital – the numerator in the capital ratio – for these firms that is currently in place, with the exception of applying the requirement to reflect unrealized losses and gains on certain securities and other aspects of accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). The re-proposal would maintain this element to better reflect interest rate risk in capital, a problem that played a major role in last March's bank failures. For large banks with assets between $100 and $250 billion, the re-proposal would not apply the credit risk and operational risk frameworks of the expanded risk-based approach to these banking organizations, maintaining a simpler capital framework for these less complex firms. For these firms, the re-proposal would also revert to the simpler definition of capital for these firms that is currently in place, with the exception of applying the requirement to reflect unrealized losses and gains on certain securities and other aspects of AOCI. G-SIB surcharge proposalAs I noted, last July, we sought comment on proposed revisions to the G-SIB surcharge, to better reflect the systemic risk of each G-SIB. In particular, the proposal would make adjustments to limit "window dressing" by requiring banks to report indicators as average values instead of on a point-in-time basis. It would also reduce "cliff effects" by calculating a G-SIB's capital surcharge in 0.1 percent increments instead of 0.5 percent increments. And the proposal would adjust how we measure some systemic indicators to better align them with risk.6 The goal of the 2023 proposal was to improve the risk sensitivity of the G-SIB surcharge. Commenters provided helpful feedback regarding the proposal's potential impact on certain types of activities, such as client clearing of derivatives. We are still considering these comments, but let me speak to areas where I will recommend making changes to the original proposal. First, I'll speak to the treatment of cleared derivatives. The proposal would have increased the extent to which client-cleared derivatives contribute to a bank's G-SIB surcharge, to promote consistency of the measure. However, commenters argued that the measure might result in higher costs and more volatility for derivative end users and might reduce incentives to provide clients' access to central clearing. While it is important for our capital rules to be risk-sensitive, it is also important that we consider the impact of our rules in the broader market context. Central clearing of derivatives is a critical tool that can help improve transparency and reduce systemic risk. To avoid disincentives for client clearing, I intend to recommend to the Board that we not adopt the proposed changes to capital requirements associated with client clearing. Second, let me speak to changes in the surcharge proposal that I will recommend to keep the measures we use up-to-date. The U.S. G-SIB surcharge was set nearly nine years ago, and the growth in the economy since 2015 has meant that G-SIBs' measures of systemic risk have increased, even for firms whose share of domestic or global economic activity has not increased. The Board noted the potential for this effect in the original 2015 G-SIB rule. While it did not provide a mechanism to automatically adjust for economic growth at that time, the Board stated that it would periodically reevaluate the framework. As part of the G-SIB re-proposal, I intend to recommend that we improve the calculation of the capital surcharges for G-SIBs by reflecting changes in the global banking system since the Board adopted the G-SIB surcharge in 2015. In addition, for the future, I intend to recommend that we account for effects from inflation and economic growth in the measurement of a G-SIB's systemic risk profile. As a result, a G-SIB's surcharge would not change based simply on growth in the economy.7 ConclusionThe journey to improve capital requirements since the Global Financial Crisis has been a long one, and Basel III endgame is an important element of this effort. These re-proposals bring us closer to completing the task. The broad and material changes to both proposals that I've outlined today would better balance the benefits and costs of capital in light of comments received, and result in a capital framework that appropriately reflects the risks of bank activities and is tiered to the banking sector. They also bring the proposals broadly in line with what other major jurisdictions are doing. And what does this all mean? A safer and fairer banking system. My goal, throughout my nearly 30 years in this field, has always been to help ensure that the banking system can support households and businesses of all types, during good times and bad. In addition to the re-proposals outlined today, we are looking carefully at how our stress test complements the risk-based capital rules to help ensure our overall framework supports a resilient and effective banking sector. We are attentive to the interactions across all components of our capital framework as well as the combined burden and benefits, and we take these issues seriously. In all of our work, we will continue to seek an approach that helps to ensure financial system resiliency and supports the flow of credit to households and businesses. It is most imperative that we get this right. Thank you. 1. The views I express here are my own, and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Michael S. Barr, "Why Bank Capital Matters" (speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, December 1, 2022), and Michael S. Barr, "Holistic Capital Review (PDF)" (speech at the Bipartisan Policy Center, Washington, DC, July 10, 2023).Return to text 3. Under standard corporate finance theory, a firm should be indifferent between debt and equity, but in practice, as compared to debt, equity is a more expensive source of funding to a bank given the structure of our laws and markets, the presence of deposit insurance and other government support, and other factors. See, e.g., Franco Modigliani and Merton H. Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of Investment,"The American Economic Review48 (June 1958): 261–297, and Ron J. Feldman, Gary H. Stern, and Paul A. Volcker,Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts(Washington: Brookings Institution Press, 2009).Return to text 4. The G-SIB surcharge is an additional layer of capital just for the G-SIBs, and it is measured on several factors of each G-SIB, specific to their individual risks.Return to text 5. To the extent that such a firm has large trading operations, it would also be subject to the revised market risk framework.Return to text 6. With regard to the adjustments to address window dressing and cliff effects, these will have a one-time impact on banks that carefully manage their operations to lower surcharge buckets, but should improve the efficiency and risk-sensitivity of the measure over time.Return to text 7. The re-proposal would update the method 2 coefficients to reflect changes from 2015 until the present using a methodology that is consistent with the Board's original calibration in 2015. Specifically, the supplemental proposal would update the method 2 coefficients for each of the systemic indicators for the size, interconnectedness, complexity, and cross-jurisdictional activity categories from 2015 until the present using the most recent available two-year average of aggregate global indicator amounts and the corresponding three-year average of euro/U.S. dollar exchange rates. Going forward, it would also include a mechanism to annually adjust the method 2 coefficients for each of the systemic indicators for the size, interconnectedness, complexity, and cross-jurisdictional activity categories based on U.S. inflation and real economic growth. This mechanism would use a three-year moving average of annual nominal U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth to adjust these coefficients on an annual basis.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana Thank you, Eric, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.1My topic is the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for monetary policy, a set of judgements that have, of course, been influenced by this morning's jobs report. When I scheduled this speech several months ago, I knew it might be challenging to speak a few hours after the release of such an important piece of data. But we like to say that monetary policy must be nimble, so that means policymakers must be nimble also. NotSimone Biles nimble, but nimble. As you will hear, I believe the data we have received this week reinforces the view that there has been continued moderation in the labor market. In light of the considerable and ongoing progress toward the Federal Open Market Committee's 2 percent inflation goal, I believe that the balance of risks has shifted toward the employment side of our dual mandate, and that monetary policy needs to adjust accordingly. Looking back at the economic data over the first six months of 2024, it portrayed an economy slowly cooling and not showing signs of significant weakening. The labor market had been gradually moderating for the past year or so, and although inflation rose in the first quarter, it then retreated in the second, and there was a widespread view heading into the second half of the year that the FOMC was on track to achieve a much desired but unusual "soft landing." Then the July jobs report came in unexpectedly soft. Job creation slowed and the unemployment rate increased by two tenths of a percentage point to 4.3 percent, the highest since October 2021. There was speculation that weather-related issues might have distorted these results and, in fact, the unemployment rate ticked down in this morning's release. But, overall, the August report along with other recent labor data tend to confirm that there has been a continued moderation in the labor market. The ups and downs in the data over time highlight what I consider the right approach to meeting the FOMC's dual mandate goals—I believe we should be data dependent, but not overreact to any data point, including the latest data. When we faced a period of banking instability in the spring of 2023, there were calls from some to stop rate hikes despite inflation still running over 5 percent. But there were other tools in hand to deal with that stress, monetary policy did not overreact, and the FOMC continued tightening policy. When inflation fell unexpectedly in the second half of last year, we did not overreact and immediately cut the policy rate. Then when inflation accelerated in the first quarter, we did not overreact and raise rates despite some calls to do so. I will be looking at these last two employment reports in combination with all other data as we head into the September FOMC meeting to decide the best stance of policy. I believe our patience over the past 18 months has served us well. But the current batch of data no longer requires patience, it requires action. Today's jobs report continues the longer-term pattern of a softening of the labor market that is consistent with moderate growth in economic activity, the details of which I will get into in a moment. As I said at the outset, considering the progress we have made on getting inflation back to target, I believe that the balance of risks is now weighted more toward downside risks to the FOMC's maximum-employment mandate. While the labor market has clearly cooled, based on the evidence I see, I do not believe the economy is in a recession or necessarily headed for one soon. The collective set of economic data indicates to me that the labor market and the economy are performing in a solid manner and the prospects for continued growth and job creation are good, with inflation near 2 percent. I continue to believe that this can occur without substantial harm to the labor market. But I also believe that maintaining the economy's forward momentum means that, as Chair Powell said recently, the time has come to begin reducing the target range for the federal funds rate. In the rest of my remarks, I will lay out my reasons for believing that the economy and employment will likely keep growing as inflation moves toward 2 percent. The first of these is the large body of evidence that economic activity is continuing to grow at a solid pace. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at a 2.2 percent annual rate in the first half of this year and recent data indicates that growth is continuing at around this pace in the third quarter. Retail sales were stronger than expected in July and showed that households continue to spend as their finances, in the aggregate, remain healthy. The increase was fairly broad based across goods categories. While many online retailers offered discounts last month, this was not a dominant factor in the solid results. Although manufacturing output fell in July and the August Institute for Supply Management manufacturing survey pointed to weak production and new orders, the similar survey for the larger, nonmanufacturing sector was consistent with a modest expansion of activity. As for the labor market, on balance, the data that we have received in the past three days indicates to me that the labor market is continuing to soften but not deteriorate, and this judgement is important to our upcoming decision on monetary policy. As I said earlier, Wednesday's report on job openings in July was consistent with a moderating labor market. Meanwhile, the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance has risen gradually since January but has changed little on net in the past two months, with initial claims remaining fairly low. The jobs report for August, released this morning, supported the story of ongoing moderation in the labor market. After rising to 4.3 percent in July, the unemployment rate ticked down to 4.2 percent in August. Taking a longer perspective, the unemployment rate over the past 16 months has increased gradually but fairly steadily from 3.4 percent to 4.2 percent in today's release. Payrolls rose by 142,000 in August compared with 89,000 in July, leaving the three-month average payroll gain at 116,000, compared with the 267,000 average in the first quarter and 147,000 in the second. Accounting for revisions to the jobs numbers that we received in August, that level is a bit below what I see as the breakeven pace for job creation that absorbs new entrants to the workforce and keeps the unemployment rate constant.2 July marked the first time that the three-month average unemployment rate has increased by at least a half of a percentage point above its 12-month low, which was 3.6 percent in July 2023. This breached a threshold established by the Sahm rule, which observes that when this has occurred in the past, it has been a reliable indicator of the economy entering a recession. While this is a correlation that certainly bears attention, I want to make a few cautionary points about relying on such rules in deciding that a recession has begun. As we have seen in the recent past with other supposedly reliable recession rules, such as an inverted yield curve, there is more to forecasting economic outcomes than the relationships between a couple of variables. First, these rules are nothing more than a mechanical, statistical description of past economic outcomes—they do not seek to explain what economic forces drive the relationship between the data, nor are they based on the totality of economic data. All recessions rules do is pick up a correlation between movements in economic data and the dates of recessions or other outcomes. A second point is that, setting aside the unusual circumstances of the 1981–82 recession, recessions occur when a major shock hits the economy.3In the absence of a big negative shock, an inversion of the yield curve or a triggering of the Sahm rule doesn't necessarily mean we are entering a recession. Third, recession rules typically pick up demand-driven recessions. But this is not why unemployment is rising now. GDP forecasts for the current quarter all show solid growth, labor market data show lay off rates are stable, and consumer spending is growing at a healthy rate. These data suggest demand is fairly strong. Instead, most of the increase in the unemployment rate is from workers entering the labor force and not finding jobs right away. So, the recent rise in the unemployment rate appears to be more of a supply-side-driven phenomenon, not demand driven. And lastly, it should be clear to everyone that many pre-pandemic economic relationships have not proven to be good policy guides post-pandemic. Reliance on old lessons from inverted yield curves to predict a recession, a Phillips curve to predict inflation, or a flat Beveridge curve to predict the movement in the unemployment rate have all led to mistaken economic forecasts. While I don't see the recent data pointing to a recession, I do see some downside risk to employment that I will be watching closely. But at this point, I believe there is substantial evidence that the economy retains the strength and momentum to keep growing, supported by an appropriate loosening of monetary policy. Let me now turn to the outlook for inflation. With the labor market cooling, it doesn't surprise me that wage growth has slowed to a pace consistent with the FOMC's price-stability goal, and this is supporting ongoing progress toward that objective. The employment cost index grew at an annualized rate of 3.5 percent from March to June, and the 12-month change was 3.9 percent for private sector workers, the lowest since late 2021.4Average hourly earnings, reported in today's jobs report, rose at a three-month annualized pace of 3.8 percent in August, the same as the 12-month change. Inflation in July continued to show progress toward the FOMC's goal. The price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), the Committee's preferred inflation measure, increased at a monthly pace of 0.2 percent in July for both total and core PCE inflation. Core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is a good guide to underlying inflation, and it increased 2.7 percent over the past 12 months. Given the downward trajectory of monthly readings, I also look at the 6- and 3-month annualized rate. These stand at 2.6 percent and 1.7 percent, respectively. These numbers are good news and suggest that our restrictive policy stance has put us on the right path to attain our 2 percent inflation target. Looking across the components of inflation, one can see the breadth of the disinflation. Over 50 percent of categories in the total and core market baskets had annualized monthly inflation less than 2.5 percent in August. In fact, the index of core goods prices has reverted to its historical pattern of slight deflation, reflecting normalized supply after the disruptions of the pandemic as well as ongoing technological and productivity advances. Meanwhile, services price inflation has slowed as wage growth has slowed, since labor is a large input for much of the service sector. Overall, I see significant and ongoing progress toward the FOMC's inflation goal that I expect will continue over the remainder of this year. Now let me discuss the implications of this outlook for monetary policy. As I said at the outset, considering the achieved and continuing progress on inflation and moderation in the labor market, I believe the time has come to lower the target range for the federal funds rate at our upcoming meeting. Reducing the policy rate now is consistent with many versions of the Taylor rule, which suggest reducing the policy rate is appropriate given the data in hand. Furthermore, I do not expect this first cut to be the last. With inflation and employment near our longer-run goals and the labor market moderating, it is likely that a series of reductions will be appropriate. I believe there is sufficient room to cut the policy rate and still remain somewhat restrictive to ensure inflation continues on the path to our 2 percent target. Determining the appropriate pace at which to reduce policy restrictiveness will be challenging. Choosing a slower pace of rate cuts gives time to gradually assess whether the neutral rate has in fact risen, but at the risk of moving too slowly and putting the labor market at risk. Cutting the policy rate at a faster pace means a greater likelihood of achieving a soft landing but at the risk of overshooting on rate cuts if the neutral rate has in fact risen above its pre-pandemic level. This would cause an undesired loosening of monetary policy. Determining the pace of rate cuts and ultimately the total reduction in the policy rate are decisions that lie in the future. As of today, I believe it is important to start the rate cutting process at our next meeting. If subsequent data show a significant deterioration in the labor market, the FOMC can act quickly and forcefully to adjust monetary policy. I am open-minded about the size and pace of cuts, which will be based on what the data tell us about the evolution of the economy, and not on any pre-conceived notion of how and when the Committee should act. If the data supports cuts at consecutive meetings, then I believe it will be appropriate to cut at consecutive meetings. If the data suggests the need for larger cuts, then I will support that as well. I was a big advocate of front-loading rate hikes when inflation accelerated in 2022, and I will be an advocate of front-loading rate cuts if that is appropriate. Those decisions will be determined by new data and how it adds to the totality of the data and shapes my understanding of economic conditions. While I expect that these cuts will be done carefully as the economy and employment continue to grow, in the context of stable inflation, I stand ready to act promptly to support the economy as needed. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The preliminary estimate of the annual benchmark revision to the establishment survey data, which was announced on August 21, suggests that payroll growth between April 2023 and March 2024 will likely be revised down early next year by about 68,000 per month on average. The implications for payroll growth beyond March are less clear.Return to text 3. The 1981–82 recession was triggered by tight monetary policy in an effort to fight mounting inflation. For more information about this recession, seeFederal Reserve History.Return to text 4. The employment cost index is a valuable measure of compensation growth because it covers non-wage benefits and accounts for shifts in the shares of workers in different occupations and industries.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio I am grateful for the educational opportunities this university has afforded my family over the years, including my uncle Samuel DuBois Cook who received his M.A. and Ph.D. here in 1950 and 1953. I am delighted to be here! Today, I would like to discuss the implications of artificial intelligence (AI) for workers and the labor market, more generally.1I will discuss AI's potential to boost productivity, offer a framework to consider which jobs will be most affected by AI, and consider AI's effect on aggregate employment. I hope this discussion will be informative for many of you in the audience, especially those of you who will be entering the job market in the next few years. However, before discussing AI, I think it will be helpful to first set the stage by reviewing how the labor market has evolved in recent years and where it is today. View of the Labor MarketOn the eve of the pandemic, the labor market was quite strong. The unemployment rate was flirting with historical lows, having fallen to 3.5 percent in the fall of 2019 from an average of 4.7 percent between 2014 and 2019. Jobs were relatively plentiful, with 12 openings for every 10 unemployed job seekers. Then, the labor market changed dramatically in the first few months of the pandemic when economies around the world shut down. By April 2020, nearly one out of every seven U.S. workers was unemployed. The U.S. labor market lost more than 20 million jobs in just two months. To put that into perspective, that is nearly four times the total number of jobs in Ohio. U.S. workers and employers, with the support of timely and extraordinary policy action, proved to be resilient and innovative. As we know from the National Bureau of Economic Research's Business Cycle Dating Committee, the pandemic recession was the shortest on record, even though it was the deepest since the Great Depression. By mid-2020, the economy was growing again. And grow it did. The labor market roared back, gaining 25 million jobs in the three years from its low point in April 2020. Demand for labor outpaced supply such that by mid-2022 there were 20 job openings for every 10 unemployed job seekers. By early 2023, the unemployment rate fell to 3.4 percent, its lowest level in 60 years. In the last year and a half, labor demand has moderated, as restrictive monetary policy helped bring aggregate demand in line with supply and eased inflationary pressure. At the same time, labor supply grew rapidly, and now labor demand and supply are more balanced. While the overall labor market remains solid, it has cooled noticeably this year and is now less tight than it was on the eve of the pandemic. In August, the unemployment rate stood at 4.2 percent, having risen by almost a 1/2 percentage point over the past 12 months. And, in recent months, the number of job openings relative to unemployed job seekers has fallen to just below its pre-pandemic range. As labor demand and supply are now more evenly balanced, it may become more difficult for some individuals to find employment. For example, younger workers could experience more hurdles as they look for that first job that will launch them on a longer career path. Over the past 12 months, the share of 16- to 24-year-olds in the labor force who are unemployed has risen over 1 percentage point, notably larger than the overall increase. Such data are consistent with a report in the most recent Beige Book, a compilation of anecdotal information from around the country shared with Fed officials before our meetings, indicating some recent graduates are facing unexpected difficulties finding suitable jobs.2It is also the case that less-educated and minority workers could face greater hurdles, as they tend to benefit more from tighter labor markets and suffer more from weakening economic conditions. The slowing of the solid labor market has come alongside a significant easing in inflationary pressure. Inflation was 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in July, notably closer to our 2 percent target than a year earlier—when inflation was 3.3 percent—and far below its peak of 7 percent in mid-2022. In recent months, the upside risks to inflation have diminished, and the downside risks to employment have increased. In response to these changing conditions, I whole heartedly supported the decision at last week's Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting to lower our policy interest rate by 1/2 percentage point. The FOMC, of which I am a member, is the Federal Reserve's primary monetary policymaking body. That decision reflected growing confidence that, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, the solid labor market can be maintained in a context of moderate economic growth and inflation continuing to move sustainably down to our target. In thinking about the path of policy moving forward, I will be looking carefully at incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The return to balance in the labor market between supply and demand, as well as the ongoing return toward our inflation target, reflects the normalization of the economy after the dislocations of the pandemic. This normalization, particularly of inflation, is quite welcome, as a balance between supply and demand is essential for sustaining a prolonged period of labor-market strength. Of course, there will always be new developments and changes that will reshape the labor market. Recent advances in AI technology are perhaps the most talked about and debated of such developments today. I anticipate that these advances may have a significant effect on workers, the labor market, and the economy in coming years. Artificial Intelligence and ProductivityFrom the outset, I, like most of my economist colleagues studying the economics of innovation and AI closely, acknowledge that the implications of AI are highly uncertain. We still do not know what the ultimate magnitude or intensity of this effect will be, which workers and firms will be most affected, or even the time period over which these effects will be realized. But today, I will highlight how economic theory and some recent studies can shed initial light on these critical questions. The key reason why many expect AI will have a substantial effect on the economy is, because AI has the potential to provide a large and sustained boost to labor-productivity growth—which is simply how much output of an individual worker grows over time. Ultimately, growth in output per person, workers' real earnings, and households' real purchasing power can all be tied back to growth in labor productivity. Like many of the most significant technological innovations of the past 200 or so years—such as the steam engine, electricity, computers, and the internet—AI has the potential to affect labor productivity in a plethora of economic activities across many industries and occupations. For instance, over the past few years we have seen dramatic advances in generative AI technologies, which synthesize massive quantities of data to create models that can produce high-quality text, images, and video. Building upon these recent advances, a wide variety of new AI assistants have been deployed to help workers in a broad range of jobs. Although the degree to which these new assistants will improve labor productivity is likely to be quite idiosyncratic, some early studies suggest the effects could be large. One recent study examined the effect of an AI assistant for customer support agents and found that agents using the AI assistant resolved 14 percent more customer issues per hour—with this improvement being most pronounced for workers with comparatively less experience and less formal training.3 But perhaps even more promising is AI's potential for improving our ability to generate new ideas. AI is being used in drug discovery to identify novel chemical compounds; in energy research to extend the duration of a fusion reaction; and in engineering to better understand the aerodynamics of automobiles, airplanes, and ships. If AI can improve our ability to generate new ideas, then it could provide a long-term boost to labor productivity growth, as each newly discovered idea will itself provide an incremental boost to labor productivity. Judging the Effect of Artificial Intelligence on OccupationsBecause of their effects on labor productivity, past technological innovations have resulted in dramatic positive and negative shocks to the demand for specific occupations or tasks. We should expect AI to do the same: eliminating some jobs but, crucially, also creating new ones. As a society, we will need to consider how to retrain and support workers who may be displaced from their jobs, even as many others benefit from AI adoption. As I think about AI's implications for employment in any given job or task, I tend to focus on three questions. How much exposure?First, how exposed is a particular job to AI? It is helpful to think about a job as a set of tasks that the worker must perform. Economist David Autor pioneered this task-based framework for jobs. He used it to demonstrate that the shift in labor demand, which began in the 1970s, away from jobs that involved a large degree of routine tasks can be explained by these jobs' greater exposure to the rapid adoption of computerization and automation technologies.4We can take a similar task-based approach to determine a job's exposure to AI. Start by considering what share of a job's tasks can be performed by AI. For example, we might expect AI to be able to perform a larger share of a software programmer's tasks versus those of a plumber. Next, for those tasks that can be performed by AI, consider how well AI performs them relative to a typical worker. For instance, generative AI is used in a medical setting to summarize patient interviews—a task that it performs quite well relative to a human doctor. Based on that interview, AI could diagnose a patient and develop a treatment plan, but these are tasks that doctors still tend to perform better than AI. Finally, for those tasks that can be performed by AI, think about the quality threshold required for that job task.Coming back to the example of a doctor and AI, while there may be some tolerance for incorrectly summarizing a patient interview, there is little tolerance for misdiagnosing a patient or developing a bad treatment plan. I would also note that we may have higher quality thresholds for AI than we do for human workers—with driverless cars being an example where AI drivers may be held to a higher standard than human drivers. Thus, a job will be more exposed to AI, if AI can perform a large share of the job's tasks sufficiently well relative to a human worker and a set of quality thresholds. Importantly, we can expect that a job's exposure to AI will change over time, because advances in AI technology will both expand the set of tasks that AI can perform and improve the quality of AI's performance of those tasks. Which brings me to my second question for AI's implications for any given job. Complement or substitute?Will AI be a complement to or a substitute for the job, given its set of tasks? AI is more likely to serve as a complement to jobs that have less exposure to AI but use the services or products that are produced by jobs with a high degree of AI exposure. For instance, a job as a litigator may have little direct exposure to AI but will benefit from AI's ability to assist with legal research.5 Even for some jobs with a high degree of exposure to AI, it is possible for AI to serve as a complement. Let's return to the example of the doctor, who may now see more patients or spend more time on diagnoses, because AI has taken over writing summaries of patient interviews. More broadly, jobs with a high degree of exposure to AI will likely be complemented by AI, if workers are able to offload time-intensive, but low value-added, tasks to AI and focus their time on the highest value-added tasks. However, we can expect that there will be some jobs that have a high degree of exposure to AI and for which AI can perform some especially high-valued tasks. Thus, AI may be more of a substitute for human labor in these jobs. But even for these jobs, the employment implications are ambiguous and will depend on the third question. What is the elasticity of demand?What is the price elasticity of demand for the output of these jobs that are highly affected by AI? To understand what I mean, it is helpful to consider a concrete example. I want to come back to the software programmer jobs that I mentioned before as having a high degree of exposure to AI. Recent advances in generative AI have resulted in the development of new AI-powered coding assistants that help automate some aspects of writing software code. Some early studies have found that these AI coding assistants can provide a significant boost to programmers' productivity. One randomized controlled trial found that these AI coding assistants cut in half the amount of time it took to finish a small programming project.6Another study found that programmers who were randomly assigned to use an AI coding assistant submitted 20 percent more requests each week asking to add code they had written to a software project.7And I emphasize that these tools are still in their infancy, which suggests that the productivity gains for software-programming jobs may be even larger. These productivity enhancements will allow software programming projects to be delivered in less time and at a lower cost. As we know from economic theory, as the costs and delivery times for software projects fall, demand for such projects should increase. The number of software-programming jobs will depend on whether the demand for software projects increases more than one for one with the decrease in cost. In other words, is the price elasticity of demand for software projects greater than one? If it is, then the reduction in software programmers' hours devoted to programming tasks that can now be performed by AI will be more than offset by the increase in their hours from the greater demand for AI-enhanced software programming. I find these questions helpful for framing how to think about AI's implications for any job or set of tasks. While I mentioned that there will likely be benefits for certain workers, it is important to recognize a universal lesson from past technological innovations—namely, that the employment and earnings of some workers are likely to be negatively affected by these innovations. The magnitude and extent of these negative effects will depend on a variety of factors. For instance, consider if AI is able to perform job tasks that previously required a high degree of training or specialization. Affected workers in these jobs could experience larger declines in their earning power, if AI depreciates the value of their accumulated human capital. The degree to which AI could negatively affect some workers' earnings and employment will also be influenced by the pace of AI adoption. It is possible that if AI adoption is rapid, we could see the effects on some workers come quickly and be more concentrated, depending on which sectors are early adopters. Implications of Artificial Intelligence for Aggregate EmploymentIn addition to considering AI's effects on individual workers, economists also evaluate AI's implications for aggregate employment. As I discussed, it remains unclear whether AI will be a boon for or a drag on net employment for those jobs that are most directly affected by AI. For workers who are not directly exposed to AI but, rather, are users of the output from AI-exposed jobs, the aggregate employment implications are more likely to be positive. Generally, these downstream jobs will benefit from the lower input costs that result from greater productivity realized by AI-exposed jobs. An exception might be jobs where the cheaper inputs are a substitute for labor in the downstream job. Moreover, I anticipate that inventors and innovators will continue to discover new products and services that are enabled by AI. The companies that are then formed to deliver these new products and services can be expected to raise aggregate employment. In light of the uncertainty regarding AI's implications for the labor market, I want to highlight the important role that decisions by firms and, to a lesser extent, workers can have for determining how AI will affect the labor market. If incumbent firms are able to adjust their processes to capture productivity benefits from AI, then these firms could help mitigate some of AI's potential for job displacement by internally reallocating affected workers to new roles and providing necessary training. If some job tasks can be replaced with AI—especially those that are mundane and repetitive—workers may be freed up to focus on other tasks or new activities they find more rewarding. Individual workers play a limited role in determining how AI will affect their earnings and employment. Workers in jobs that will be complemented by AI might benefit from familiarizing themselves with how to effectively use AI. Workers in jobs where AI will be able to perform a substantial share of their tasks will face greater challenges. Some of these workers may seek to develop expertise in the aspects of their jobs for which AI is particularly ill-suited. Yet, many of these more-exposed workers may need to invest in training in alternative occupations that are less exposed to AI, similar to some of the skill-retraining efforts for manufacturing workers over the past 50 years. ConclusionIn closing, I suspect that the tremendous uncertainty I highlighted related to AI's implications for the labor market will be some combination of disconcerting and exciting for many in the audience, especially those who will be graduating and launching their careers in the coming years. My recommendation to you is to take the time to experiment with AI, familiarizing yourself with its capabilities and limitations. Doing so will make you well placed to help your future employers—and that could include yourselves—transform their business processes to effectively use AI. And for the smaller subset of you who are purely excited about the opportunity presented by AI, I look forward to seeing the innovative new products and services you create and disseminate throughout the economy to raise the living standards for all Americans. Thank you for having me at The Ohio State University. I look forward to your questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The August 2024 Beige Book is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/BeigeBook_20240904.pdf.Return to text 3. See Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey R. Raymond (2023),"Generative AI at Work,"NBER Working Paper Series 31161 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April; revised November).Return to text 4. See David H. Autor, Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003), "The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 118 (November), pp. 1279–1333.Return to text 5. See Bloomberg Industrial Group (2024), "How Is AI Changing the Legal Profession?"Bloomberg Law,May 23.Return to text 6. See Sida Peng, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer (2023),"The Impact of AI on Developer Productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot,"working paper, February.Return to text 7. See Kevin Zheyuan Cui, Mert Demirer, Sonia Jaffe, Leon Musolff, Sida Peng, and Tobia Salz (2024),"The Productivity Effects of Generative AI: Evidence from a Field Experiment with GitHub Copilot,"An MIT Exploration of Generative AI (Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, March).Return to text