Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Girls Global Academy 2024 Commencement Ceremony, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Dr. O'Neal. It is an honor to be here to celebrate with you—the Girls Global Academy's first-ever graduating class. This is a momentous achievement and occasion. You are making history today! But, of course, you could not have done it alone. So let me start by acknowledging the teachers; administrators, staff, and board members of the Girls Global Academy; and the parents, grandparents, siblings, mentors, and friends who made today possible. Thank you and congratulations on a job well done. And a very special congratulations to the Girls Global Academy Class of 2024! Soon you will embark on new journeys. I understand that many of you are going on to college in the fall, including one of you heading to my alma mater, Spelman College. (Be sure not to miss the 144th Founders Day celebration next year and the annual Spelman-Morehouse Christmas Carol concert in historic Sisters Chapel.) Others are off to start careers or to pursue vocational training. One of you will enter public service directly and become a member of the U.S. Air Force. That is a lot to be proud of and excited about. Whatever path you take next, I know the education and experience you gained here will guide you. The Class of 2024 stands out. This is not only because you are the first, but also because you achieved so much all while overcoming extremely challenging circumstances by starting high school during the pandemic. Like you, I know what it is like to be the first to take a path, a path that was not always smooth and predictable. I will tell you more about that shortly. Four years ago, all of you could have taken a more well-marked route. Instead, you had the courage to enroll at a brand new school during a global pandemic. You learned virtually during your first year. When you were able to attend your school in person for the first time, you did so with masks on, while social distancing. Forging new friendships is always challenging. It is even harder when you cannot sit next to a new classmate at the lunch table. But I know you worked hard to move your learning and your friendships beyond the screens and into real life. Now that those bonds have formed, I hope you hold on to them for many years to come, as I did with my classmates at a women's college. As the inaugural class of the Girls Global Academy, your list of firsts is long and impressive. You formed the academy's first ever student government. You started a debate team and created cooking and DJ clubs, to name a few. You took the court and field as the first volleyball, basketball, softball, track, and cross-country teams. (I would have gone out for the softball and track teams. I was a catcher on my softball team in junior high and shot put was my event on the track team in high school.) Everything was new, and probably a bit scary. Yet, you learned to become outspoken, you took on leadership roles, and you set an example for younger students. Through it all you grew, and you became the remarkable young women you are today. With all those firsts, I was told that you sometimes call yourselves "the guinea pigs." I get that. However, I would like to offer a different moniker for this group: trailblazers. You bravely went where no one had gone before, and you accomplished great things through difficult challenges. To honor that, I want to tell you about a favorite trailblazer of mine and a girl who looked up to her. The trailblazer I am thinking of is Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. A little more than a century ago, she graduated from high school here in Washington, D.C., less than a mile away from your school. It was then called M Street High School. She went on to earn bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Pennsylvania. During her doctoral studies, she undertook research on the living standards of Black families that were migrating to Philadelphia during World War I. After completing that work, she became the second African American woman ever to earn a PhD and the first African American to earn a PhD in economics. But in the 1920s, Dr. Alexander was actively denied entry into the economics profession on the basis of her race and sex. Some might have been crushed and deterred by the impediment. Not Dr. Alexander. Instead, she went on to blaze another trail. She became the first African American woman to earn a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Alexander was also the first African American woman to pass the bar and practice law in the state of Pennsylvania. She continued to think and write about economic issues in her legal work and public service. She went on to be a top attorney for the city of Philadelphia and served the public in many other ways, including being asked by two U.S. presidents to serve on important committees. Dr. Alexander was also the first national president of Delta Sigma Theta, a public service sorority. My mother helped to start a Delta Sigma Theta chapter at Georgia College and State University. That is how I first learned about Dr. Alexander. In fact, when I was in seventh grade, I entered my county social science fair with a project inspired by her work: identifying the major causes of unemployment among Black Americans. I did not realize it then, but that turned out to be my first foray into economic research, which became the cornerstone of my career. It was helpful to have trailblazers to look up to, including Dr. Alexander, but also my aunts, uncles, parents, and other relatives and family friends who played important roles in the Civil Rights Movement. They instilled in me the confidence to blaze trails of my own. I was among the first African American students to desegregate one of the schools I attended in my hometown of Milledgeville, Georgia. Although some of the students and others in the community did not welcome us, I drew strength from the example set by my family and others in the Civil Rights Movement, and from their conviction in the hope and promise of a world that could and would continually improve. While I had an interest in economics even before I entered high school, that profession was not the first path I choose. I started Spelman as a physics and philosophy major. It was not until after my undergraduate years, when I was literally on a trail—one climbing Mount Kilimanjaro—that I discovered economics was the path for me. I was hiking alongside a British economist. By the end of that journey, he had convinced me that studying economics would provide me the tools to address some big and important questions I had pondered for a long time—as far back as when Dr. Alexander inspired my submission to the county social science fair. Following in her footsteps, I went on to earn my PhD in economics from the University of California, Berkeley. The path of an economist led me many places, including to Moscow to research banking in pre- and post-Soviet Russia and to the White House as an economist for President Obama's Council of Economic Advisers. In 2022, President Biden nominated me to serve on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I am proud to say that I am the first African American woman and first woman of color to serve on the Board of Governors, a body that makes decisions affecting the entire economy and the well-being of every American. I hope that my story, and Dr. Alexander's story, might inspire you to see that even when you encounter roadblocks, you can chart your own path and achieve great things. I know you can do that, because you established a strong foundation here at the Girls Global Academy, starting with the four pillars of sisterhood, scholarship, service, and safety. I can see you have the spirit of sisterhood today as you celebrate all your achievements. You established a sisterhood as the first Girls Global Academy alumnae, and you also joined a broader sisterhood of strong, courageous, trailblazing women. You are scholars, earning your diploma and going on to college and onto various career paths. You worked in service to your community by each completing at least 50 service hours. The scholarship and service pillars show that you are already like Dr. Alexander, who highly valued education and used her education to improve the world. And you certainly learned the importance of safety as you started high school in the pandemic—and the importance of creating a safe environment of belonging where you can learn, be challenged, and grow, while comfortably being yourself. Holding these four pillars close will serve you well as you take the next step in your journeys. As I conclude, I would like to thank you for allowing me to add another first—the first Girls Global Academy commencement speaker. I am deeply humbled by this honor. Once again, congratulations to the very first Girls Global Academy graduating class—the Class of 2024! We are all so proud of you and cannot wait to see what you will do.
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2024 Marshall Forum: A U.S.-U.K. Strategic and Economic Dialogue, Chicago, Illinois Thank you, John. And thank you to the Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission and the commissioners for this most extraordinary honor. To be mentioned alongside previous Marshall Medal recipients, such as Secretary Madeleine Albright, Secretary Colin Powell, Justice Stephen Breyer, and eminent political scientist and university president Nan Keohane, is humbling. The distinction is especially meaningful to me, because I have taken great pride in being a Marshall Scholar from the moment I was selected during my senior year at Spelman College. In the years since, I have enjoyed meeting and being inspired by Marshall Scholars throughout the country and around the world. I also have enjoyed reviewing the applications of future Marshall Scholars, one way in which I have taken seriously the responsibility to serve as an ambassador for the program. I look forward to continuing to serve in such an ambassadorial role as a Marshall Medal recipient. Again, I am beyond grateful to the Commission for the truly humbling and thrilling honor.1 My Marshall experience completely changed my thinking about my life and career. The people I met had many different interests and experiences and were preparing for careers I had never heard of until I began my studies at the University of Oxford. I relished learning more about British culture and immersing myself in one of the U.K.'s and the world's storied universities. Likewise, I took pride in the fact that I could share my ideas, culture, and experiences with others during my time as a Marshall Scholar, and I forged strong friendships that endure to this day. Gaining a fuller understanding of the friendship and respect between the U.S. and U.K., and the global importance of these two economies and democracies, has held me in good stead for many years and continues to be important in my current role as a member of the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors. In fact, I had my eyes on studying in Europe as far back as junior high school, when, during Latin class, I dreamed of following the Appian Way and other Roman routes that stretched from Britain to Israel to Morocco. I was eager to put my Girl Scout navigation and itinerary-building skills to the test on another continent. My first taste of European life came during my junior year abroad, when I won a Charles L. Merrill Scholarship to study in Strasbourg, France. During spring break of that year, I purchased a student Britrail pass and traveled to London, Southampton, and Stratford-upon-Avon. I met students and other people from all over Europe throughout the year, and I had many conversations on trains, ferries, and beaches, as well as in hostels and homes to which I was invited. I was immensely grateful to be able to do so many things my parents never had the opportunity to do, and I was eager to continue such experiences. As a result, on the advice of my mentors at Spelman—Professors Ethel Githii, Margery Ganz, and Lois Moreland—as well as the president at the time, Donald M. Stewart, I applied for the Marshall Scholarship and was humbled to be the first Spelman student to receive it. Transformative ExperienceReflecting on the essay I wrote for my Marshall application, I invoked Plato's allegory of the cave from Book VII of theRepublicto describe the transformation in my world view that occurred during my junior year abroad when it was challenged almost daily. My time as a Marshall Scholar would become the next phase of this ongoing transformation. When I arrived in Oxford, I was excited and transfixed. The bucolic setting of Oxford was conducive to learning and sharing ideas. As a philosophy major at Spelman and long a student of Latin and the classics, I was incredulous that I had the chance to study philosophy at Oxford with a tutor employing the Socratic method. It was a dream come true. I lived with students from all over the world and made life-long friends. My studies at Oxford shined a bit more light on the subject of economics, perhaps subtly beginning the transformation to my eventual career. In my first (Michaelmas) term, I had a tutorial in mathematical economics, only my third economics course ever. I learned a lot, and I was surprised that I loved it! Maybe that should have been a hint? However, I did not choose it as my concentration. I had to select two subjects out of the three from philosophy, politics, and economics. I chose philosophy and politics, because I thought economics was too much fun. My most influential tutor, as we called our professors at Oxford, was philosopher of mind and metaphysics Galen Strawson. Through my interactions with him, he helped me answer the question, "How does one construct a thoughtful, systematic world view?" After I completed my studies at Oxford, Galen also helped me hone further academic pursuits and advised me on plans that ultimately led me to pursue a PhD in economics. He was generous with his time and offered very useful advice in comparing British and American economics programs. Outside of my studies, I enjoyed participating in extracurricular activities that I did not have the opportunity to participate in during high school or college. Those included the Oxford Union, the debate society, and traveling through Italy, Greece, and the Middle East during spring break of my first year. One of my favorite experiences at Oxford was producing, acting in, and serving as the dialect coach for the performance of "For Colored Girls…" by Ntozake Shange. I did so alongside my still very close friends, Ambassador Susan Rice and Congresswoman Terri Sewell. It was sponsored by the Oxford University Dramatic Society and presented in the historic Oscar Wilde Theatre at Magdalen College. It was the first time "For Colored Girls…" was put on at Oxford, because it was the first time there were six Black women to put it on! I helped actors from Liverpool and Trinidad and Tobago (and some from the U.S.) learn regional American accents. They joined four of us from the U.S. in the show, which included singing the Aretha Franklin hit "Respect." We sold out every single show. In addition to sharing American culture, I picked up on the cultural influences of the British Isles. Songs from Irish rock band U2, such as "Pride (In the Name of Love)" and "New Year's Day," seemed to constantly play in the background during my time at Oxford. That exposure proved vital a few years later when I was teaching at Harvard and two gentleman named Paul and David came to speak to my colleagues and me about debt relief for highly indebted poor countries. Initially, I did not understand why everyone was abuzz about these visitors, until someone whispered the familiar song titles in my ear. Those words instantly transported me back to my time in Britain. I was, of course, speaking to Bono and The Edge. Lasting BondsWhile the U.S. and U.K. share close cultural bonds—look no further than James Bond, Adele,Downton Abbey, Tom Jones,Monty Python, andBridgerton—the relationship between the two countries runs much deeper than that. The Marshall Scholarship has its roots with George C. Marshall and the history-changing partnership between the U.S. and U.K during World War II. It is easy to see why a long friendship has endured. We share a language (for the most part!), a history, and a belief in democratic values. Our close economic ties are one aspect of the U.S.-U.K. relationship that stands out. Our countries feature two of the world's great financial centers and share other important connections. The U.K. is the top destination of U.S. direct investment and is the second-largest source of direct investment into this country. The U.S. is the U.K.'s largest trading partner, with 22 percent of U.K. exports heading here last year. Our central banks have a close relationship as well. We at the Fed respect and work with our counterparts at the Bank of England, including through the Bank for International Settlements, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the G7, and the G20. Given our similar economic structures and banking systems, there is always much to learn from each other to help ensure a resilient financial system. Those efforts are especially important to me as I serve as chair of the Board's Committee on Financial Stability. We know economic shocks tend to reverberate around the world, so having clear and open communication with my fellow central bankers plays a valuable part in assuring financial stability. It has been wonderful to have the opportunity today to reflect on my time as a Marshall Scholar and to consider how it more fully opened my eyes, allowing me to pursue my career and my passions. As a girl from a small town in Georgia, I debated and discussed ideas and issues during and outside of my tutorials that I had never done before. I met people from many different parts of the U.K. and the world I had never encountered before and who held views I had never heard articulated before. And that, I think, is the very spirit of the Marshall Scholarship and the Marshall Medal: building respect and understanding and strengthening the enduring friendship between our two countries. Once again, thank you so very much to the Marshall Commission for this honor. I am most grateful and humbled to receive it. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Federal Reserve Board today announced that, following their joint review of the July 2023 resolution plan submissions of the eight largest and most complex banks, they identified a weakness in the plans from Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, and JPMorgan Chase. The agencies did not identify any weaknesses in the plans from the other banks. Resolution plans, also known as living wills, must describe a bank's strategy for orderly resolution in bankruptcy in the event of its material financial distress or failure. The agencies have jointly determined that each weakness identified in the 2023 plans from Bank of America, Goldman Sachs, and JPMorgan Chase is a "shortcoming." A shortcoming is a weakness that raises questions about the feasibility of the plan. The agencies jointly identified a weakness in the 2023 plan submitted by Citigroup, but reached different conclusions on its severity. The FDIC determined that the Citigroup plan is not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code and considers the weakness to be a "deficiency." A deficiency is a weakness that could undermine the feasibility of the plan. The Board concluded that the weakness is only a shortcoming. Under the resolution planning rule of the agencies, when one agency finds a shortcoming in a resolution plan and the other agency finds a deficiency, the plan is deemed to have a shortcoming. As a result, Citigroup's 2023 plan is considered to have a shortcoming. The agencies also previously identified a shortcoming in Citigroup's 2021 plan related to data quality and data management, and that shortcoming remains outstanding. The agencies provided feedback letters to each of the eight banks that identify areas for continued development of banks' resolution strategies and capabilities. For the four banks with an identified shortcoming, the letters describe the specific weaknesses resulting in the shortcoming and the remedial actions required by the agencies. The shortcomings are to be addressed in the next resolution plans due by July 1, 2025. The feedback letters also specify that each bank, in its 2025 resolution plan submission, should address the topics of contingency planning and obtaining foreign government actions necessary to execute the resolution strategy. Bank of America Corporation 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Bank of New York Mellon Corporation 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Citigroup Inc. 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) The Goldman Sachs Group 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) JPMorgan Chase & Co. 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Morgan Stanley 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) State Street Corporation 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF) Wells Fargo & Company 2023 Resolution Plan Feedback Letter (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington Bankers Associations 2024 Annual Convention, Stevenson, Washington I would like to thank the Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington Bankers Associations for the invitation to join you this morning.1It's a pleasure to be here in Washington State to speak with your members. Direct interactions like this, outside of Washington, D.C., enable me to develop a deeper understanding of what is happening in the banking industry and the regional economy. Before sharing some thoughts about the current trajectory of regulatory approvals and bank merger policy, I will discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy. Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy OutlookOver the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our meeting earlier this month, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5‑1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. After seeing considerable progress on slowing inflation last year, we have seen only modest further progress this year. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption expenditures inflation have moved roughly sideways or slightly down since December and remained elevated at 2.7 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, in April. The consumer price index (CPI) report for May showed 12-month core CPI inflation slowing to 3.4 percent from 3.6 percent in April. However, with average core CPI inflation this year through May running at an annualized rate of 3.8 percent, notably above average inflation in the second half of last year, I expect inflation to remain elevated for some time. The recent pickup in inflation in the first several months of 2024 was evident across many goods and services categories, suggesting that inflation was temporarily lower in the latter half of last year. Prices continue to be much higher than before the pandemic, which is weighing on consumer sentiment. Inflation has hit lower-income households hardest since food, energy, and housing services price increases far outpaced overall inflation throughout this episode. Economic activity increased at a strong pace last year but appears to have moderated early this year. First-quarter gross domestic product growth was slower than in the second half of last year, though private domestic final purchases continued to rise at a solid pace. Continued softness in consumer spending and weaker housing activity early in the second quarter also suggest less momentum in economic activity so far this year. Payroll employment continued to rise at a solid pace in April and May, though slightly slower than in the first quarter, partly reflecting increased immigrant labor supply. Despite some further rebalancing between supply and demand, the labor market remains tight. The unemployment rate edged up to 4.0 percent in May, while the number of job openings relative to unemployed workers declined further to near its pre-pandemic level. Labor force participation dropped back to 62.5 percent in May, which suggests no further improvement in labor supply along this margin, as labor force participation among those aged 55 or older has been persistently low. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance appears to be restrictive, and I will continue to monitor the incoming data to assess whether monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our target. As I've noted recently, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady. And should the incoming data indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower the federal funds rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. However, we are still not yet at the point where it is appropriate to lower the policy rate, and I continue to see a number of upside risks to inflation. First, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements, including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due in part to immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unlikely that further improvements along this margin will continue to lower inflation going forward, as supply chains have largely normalized, the labor force participation rate has leveled off in recent months below pre-pandemic levels, and an open U.S. immigration policy over the past few years, which added millions of new immigrants in the U.S., may become more restrictive. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, including the risk that spillovers from regional conflicts could disrupt global supply chains, putting additional upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices. There is also the risk that the loosening in financial conditions since late last year, reflecting considerable gains in equity valuations, and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that increased immigration and continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. With labor markets remaining tight, wage growth has been elevated at around or above 4 percent, still higher than the pace consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal given trend productivity growth. In light of these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the current state of the economy and predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. In my view, we should consider a range of possible scenarios that could unfold when considering how the FOMC's monetary policy decisions may evolve. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a restrictive level, I remain willing to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Regulatory Approvals in the Banking SystemBefore turning directly to regulatory approvals in the banking system and merger and acquisition policy, it is important to consider these issues in the broader context. Regulatory approvals and bank mergers and acquisitions do not occur in a vacuum. The choices that regulators make on regulatory and supervisory policy issues have profound implications for mergers and acquisitions and for the appetite of bank management to engage in those transactions. In recent months, the banking agencies have issued or finalized a large number of regulatory changes. These changes are shaping the future of the banking system. From bank capital requirements to liquidity reform, significant revisions to the Community Reinvestment Act, a regulatory attack on banks charging fees for services (including debit card interchange fees), the trend of dialing supervision up to "11" for banks of all sizes, and the ongoing erosion of tailoring all shape the contours of the banking system, including bank size, the activities in which they engage, and where activities occur within the broader financial system.2These policy decisions also create incentives and impacts that we must acknowledge and understand. When policymakers flatten and standardize regulations and supervisory expectations, we create strong incentives for banks to achieve greater economies of scale through merger and make it harder for new banks to successfully compete with existing banks. Actually implementing clear merger standards would reduce the number of necessary application denials and withdrawals. Where clear standards exist, those seeking regulatory approval will only file for approval of those transactions that will meet the banking agency standards. In my mind, this would be responsible and effective public policy. De Novo Bank FormationI continue to be concerned about the decline in the number of banks in the U.S. As I have noted in the past, there are several indications that there is an unmet demand for new bank creation demonstrated by the ongoing preference for "charter strip" acquisitions, the ongoing shift of activities out of the banking system, and the rising demand for banking-as-a-service partnerships.3 For the past decade, de novo bank formation has been largely stagnant, even as the banking industry has rapidly evolved over the same time. Many factors influence the pursuit of de novo bank charters, including the interest rate environment, business opportunities, the intense competition for qualified bank management and staff, and potentially less onerous alternatives for financial services to be provided outside of the regulated banking system. The decision to form a de novo bank is also informed by normal business considerations, including identifying investors, establishing a viable business plan, and ensuring the ability to navigate the "start-up" phase of a new bank and manage upfront operational costs, all while being subjected to intense supervisory oversight over the first several years of operation. Yet perhaps the most important factor that influences de novo bank formation is the regulatory and supervisory framework. This includes the application process and receipt of regulatory approval. This application process can be a significant obstacle to de novo bank formation. Applications often experience significant delays between the initial charter application filing with the chartering authority and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation application for deposit insurance. It often takes well in excess of a year to receive all of the required regulatory approvals to open for business. Of course, this uncertainty remains after the initial capital has been raised, shareholders identified, and a management team is ready to begin work. These delays present unique challenges for de novo founders, including incurrence of more start-up expenses, difficulty recruiting and retaining qualified management to obtain approval, and challenges in raising additional start-up capital investment. In my view, the absence of de novo bank formation over the long run will create a void in the banking system, a void that could contribute to a decline in the availability of reliable and fairly priced credit, the absence of financial services in underserved markets, and the continued shift of banking activities outside the banking system. Bank Mergers and AcquisitionsAnother pressing area of concern is the rapidly shifting approach to bank mergers and acquisitions (M&A) by some prudential regulators.4M&A transactions allow banks to evolve and thrive in our dynamic banking system and can promote the long-term health and viability of banks. M&A also ensures that banks have a meaningful path to transitioning bank ownership. The absence of a viable M&A framework increases the potential for additional risks, including limited opportunities for succession planning, especially in smaller or rural communities, and zombie banks that continue to exist but have no competitive viability or exit strategy. The impact of a more restrictive M&A framework affects institutions of all sizes, including larger institutions that are vying to compete with the very largest global systemically important banks. They may choose to pursue M&A to remain competitive with larger peers who can achieve growth organically through sheer scale. M&A is an important part of a healthy banking system. So when considering changes to the framework, I think we need to first identify the problem that needs to be solved and then ask whether any proposed solution is fair, transparent, and consistent with applicable statutes—and, critically, whether the proposed solution has the potential to damage the long-term viability of the banking system. Are there identified shortcomings in the current process or standards, and are the proposed reforms targeted and effective to address these shortcomings? One argument I have heard about the M&A regulatory approval process is that the lack of applicationdenialsdemonstrates that regulators are failing to meaningfully review and pressure-test proposals and have effectively become a rubber stamp. I think this argument lacks a strong foundation. There is ample evidence that undermines this argument, including the resource demands on institutions pursuing M&A activity and the extended time it takes to complete the regulatory review and approval process (and the not insignificant failure rate we see represented in withdrawn applications). We also have to acknowledge that choosing the path of a merger or acquisition is not undertaken lightly. These transactions require significant upfront and ongoing investment and commitment of resources. At the outset, this includes finding an appropriate acquisition target, conducting due diligence, and negotiating the terms of the transaction. Once a target is identified, the banks must prepare appropriate regulatory filings, engage with regulators during the application process, and prepare for post-approval business processes, including scheduling necessary and costly systems conversions and customer transition. This is an expensive and reputationally risky process that bankers and their boards of directors take extremely seriously. One would also expect to see different patterns emerging if regulators were truly acting as a rubber stamp for banking applications. We know from data published by the Federal Reserve that filing an application does not guarantee approval, even in the absence of a regulatory denial. The Federal Reserve's most recent report on banking applications activity identifies a significant portion of bank M&A transactions in which applications have been withdrawn.5 The processing timelines we see also seem inconsistent with a process that is operating truly as a rubber stamp. To be clear, I think we have room to do better when it comes to timely regulatory action, while maintaining a rigorous review of applications. But extended review periods are not uncommon, particularly when you include preliminary discussions and pre-filings with regulators in the published processing timelines. Some contemplated regulatory reform efforts will likely make the M&A application process slower and less efficient. One of the key risks to an effective process is a lack of timely regulatory action. The consequences of delays can significantly harm both the acquiring institution and the target, causing greater operational risk (including the risk of a failed merger), increased expenses, reputational risk, and staff attrition in the face of prolonged uncertainty. Reducing the efficiency of bank M&A can be a deterrent to healthy bank transactions. This inefficiency limits activity that ensures the value of community banks located in underserved areas, prevents institutions from pursuing prudent growth strategies, and undermines competition by preventing firms from growing to a larger scale, effectively creating a "protected class" of larger institutions. At the same time some federal regulatory agencies are imposing more onerous requirements, credit unions have increased their acquisitions of banks.6While this could solve some succession planning concerns, it is not clear how these acquisitions will ultimately impact the banking system going forward. Could these acquisitions reduce the availability of certain products and services? Will these institutions have the same incentives to serve all of the consumers in a particular community? If there are fewer banks and more credit unions, how will this data impact the competitive analysis of traditional banks merging? Historically, credit unions have had limited membership requirements and have not engaged in the same wide range of activities as banks. But in recent years, their memberships have expanded, and they are offering more of the same products and services that banks provide. Yet, unlike banks, credit unions are not required to meet the requirements of the Community Reinvestment Act or other laws that apply to banks. As some prudential regulators continue to increase the regulatory scrutiny of bank M&A, it may increase the incentives for credit unions to acquire banks if there are fewer delays and more regulatory certainty related to those transactions. Unfortunately, the past year has shown that regulatory attention is increasingly focused on other issues, with the timeliness of processing regulatory applications by banking regulators appearing to be lower on the list of priorities. Closing ThoughtsThe bank regulatory reform agenda has many implications for banks of all sizes. As regulators continue to propose and make changes to the regulatory and supervisory processes, it is vital that policymakers understand the tradeoffs between the costs and benefits of what they are changing. It is equally important that policymakers also understand the unintended consequences of their decisions. While some of the proposed changes may be designed to address particular issues, they will have broader follow-on consequences. Because of these potentially broader consequences, we must address policy from a holistic perspective rather than in a piecemeal fashion. One way to better understand the outcomes of our decisions is to hear directly from you and other stakeholders about the specific impacts—intended and unintended—of changes to the bank regulatory framework. Your feedback helps us to understand the real-world impacts of regulatory and supervisory reforms. Thank you, and I look forward to discussing these and other important issues with you today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform (PDF)," speech delivered at Protect Main Street, sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, January 17; Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)," speech delivered at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, February 27; Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)," speech delivered at the New Jersey Bankers Association Annual Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, N.J., March 7; and Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "Tailoring, Fidelity to the Rule of Law, and Unintended Consequences (PDF)," speech delivered at the Harvard Law School Faculty Club, Cambridge, Mass., March 5.Return to text 3. See Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "The Consequences of Fewer Banks in the U.S. Banking System (PDF)," speech delivered at the Wharton Financial Regulation Conference, Philadelphia, April 14.Return to text 4. See Jonathan Kanter (2023), "Merger Enforcement Sixty Years after Philadelphia National Bank," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution's Center on Regulation and Markets Event "Promoting Competition in Banking," Washington, June 20; Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2024), "Business Combinations under the Bank Merger Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,"OCC Bulletin2024-4, January 29; and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2024), "FDIC Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Revisions to Its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions," press release, March 21.Return to text 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report,January 1–June 30, 2023(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, September). This report notes that in the first half of 2023, 46 M&A applications were approved by the Federal Reserve, while 12 such applications were withdrawn.Return to text 6. See Alex Graf, Zuhaib Gull, and Gaby Villaluz (2024), "Credit Unions Dominate Early-Year Bank M&A in Washington State," S&P Global, April 15; and Arizent (2024), "15 Credit Unions That Have Acquired Banks since 2023,"American Banker,February 12.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by VersaHoldings US Corp., of Wilmington, Delaware, and its parent companies GBH Inc., of Breslau, Canada, and VersaBank, of London, Canada, to acquire Stearns Bank Holdingford National Association, located in Holdingford, Minnesota. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced that it will extend until September 6, 2024, the comment period on its proposal to expand the operating days of the Federal Reserve Banks' two large-value payments services, Fedwire®Funds Service and the National Settlement Service (NSS), to include weekends and holidays. The Board extended the comment period to allow the public more time to analyze the proposal and prepare their comments. Comments on the proposal were originally due by July 8, 2024. Currently, both the Fedwire Funds Service and the NSS operate Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Under the proposal, both services would operate every day of the year. The operating hours each day would remain the same, with the Fedwire Funds Service open 22 hours per day, and NSS open 21.5 hours per day. The Fedwire Funds Service is a wholesale payment service that allows service participants to send and receive individual electronic funds transfers up to $10 billion. The NSS is a settlement service for participants in private-sector clearing arrangements, such as check clearinghouses, a private-sector automated clearinghouse network, and securities settlement systems. The proposal does not include changes to the Fedwire Securities Service or the Federal Reserve's new retail service for instant payments, the FedNow®Service. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Expanded Hours for Fedwire Funds Service & National Settlement Service
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by PlainsCapital Bank, of Dallas, Texas, to establish a branch at 513 West Oak Street, Suite 100, Denton, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955. Note: On June 28, 2024, the location of the main office of PlainsCapital Bank was updated in the order to University Park, Texas.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced its approval of the application by Veritex Community Bank, of Dallas, Texas, to establish a branch at 4660 Sweetwater Blvd, Sugar Land, Texas. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Thursday that results from its annual bank stress tests will be released on Wednesday, June 26, at 4:30 p.m. EDT. Additionally, aggregate results from the Board's first exploratory analysis, which will not affect bank capital requirements, will be released simultaneously. Stress tests are one supervisory tool used to measure whether banks have adequate capital to absorb losses so that they can lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. They evaluate banks' resilience by estimating losses, net revenue, and capital levels—which provide a cushion against losses—under a hypothetical recession scenario. This year, 32 banks with $100 billion or more in total assets are subject to the Board's stress tests. The scenario includes a severe global recession with heightened stress in commercial and residential real estate markets. Separately, the exploratory analysis includes four separate hypothetical elements, including two funding stresses applied to all banks tested and two market shocks applied to only the largest and most complex banks. Additional information can be foundhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The results of the Federal Reserve Board's annual bank stress test showed that while large banks would endure greater losses than last year's test, they are well positioned to weather a severe recession and stay above minimum capital requirements. Additionally, the Board published aggregate results from its first exploratory analysis, which will not affect bank capital requirements. "This year's stress test shows that large banks have sufficient capital to withstand a highly stressful scenario and meet their minimum capital ratios," Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr said. "While the severity of this year's stress test is similar to last year's, the test resulted in higher losses because bank balance sheets are somewhat riskier and expenses are higher. The goal of our test is to help to ensure that banks have enough capital to absorb losses in a highly stressful scenario. This test shows that they do." The Board's stress test is one tool to help ensure that large banks can support the economy during downturns. The test evaluates the resilience of large banks by estimating their capital levels, losses, revenue and expenses under a single hypothetical recession and financial market shock, using banks' data as of the end of last year. The individual results from the stress test inform a bank's capital requirements to help ensure a bank could survive a severe recession and financial market shock. All 31 banks tested remained above their minimum common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital requirements during the hypothetical recession, after absorbing total projected hypothetical losses of nearly $685 billion. Under stress, the aggregate CET1 capital ratio—which provides a cushion against losses—is projected to decline by 2.8 percentage points, from 12.7 percent to 9.9 percent. While this is a greater decline than last year's, it is within the range of recent stress tests. This year's hypothetical scenario is broadly comparable to last year's scenario. It includes a severe global recession with a 40 percent decline in commercial real estate prices, a substantial increase in office vacancies, and a 36 percent decline in house prices. The unemployment rate rises nearly 6-1/2 percentage points to a peak of 10 percent, and economic output declines commensurately. With the scenario relatively unchanged from last year, there are three main factors that explain the larger capital decline in this year's test: The nearly $685 billion in total projected losses includes $175 billion in credit card losses, $142 billion in losses from commercial and industrial loans, and nearly $80 billion in losses from commercial real estate. The disclosure document includes additional information about losses, including firm-specific results and figures. The Board also conducted an exploratory analysis, including two funding stresses to all banks tested and two trading book stresses to only the largest and most complex banks. The exploratory analysis is distinct from the stress test, exploring additional hypothetical risks to the broader banking system. The two funding stresses include a rapid repricing of deposits, combined with a more severe and less severe recession. Under each element, large banks would remain above minimum capital requirements in aggregate, with capital ratio declines of 2.7 percentage points and 1.1 percentage points, respectively. Under the two trading book stresses, which included the failure of five large hedge funds under different market conditions, the largest and most complex banks are projected to lose between $70 billion and $85 billion. The results demonstrated that these banks have material exposure to hedge funds but that they can withstand different types of trading book shocks. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. 2024 Federal Reserve Stress Test Results (PDF) Exploratory Analysis of Risks to the Banking System: Summary of Results (PDF) Statement on 2024 Stress Test Results by Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Stress Tests
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued an enforcement action against Evolve Bancorp, Inc. and Evolve Bank & Trust, both of West Memphis, Arkansas, for deficiencies in the bank's anti-money laundering, risk management, and consumer compliance programs. Evolve partners with various financial technology companies that, in turn, provide access to banking products and services to their end customers. Examinations conducted in 2023 found that Evolve engaged in unsafe and unsound banking practices by failing to have in place an effective risk management framework for those partnerships. In addition, Evolve did not maintain an effective risk management program or controls sufficient to comply with anti-money laundering laws and laws protecting consumers. The Board is requiring the bank to improve its policies and programs in those areas, in addition to requiring other remedial improvements. For current partnerships with financial technology companies, the Board's action requires Evolve to strengthen its risk management practices to address potential risks, including compliance and fraud risks, by implementing appropriate oversight and monitoring of those relationships, including through enhanced procedures related to recordkeeping and consumer compliance programs. The Board's enforcement action against Evolve is independent of the bankruptcy proceedings regarding Synapse Financial Technologies, Inc. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with the Arkansas State Bank Department, the state supervisor of Evolve. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Pedcor Financial, LLC, Carmel, Indiana, Pedcor Financial Bancorp, Carmel, Indiana, and Fidelity Federal Bancorp, Evansville, IndianaWritten Agreement dated June 18, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At The Salzburg Global Seminar on Financial Technology Innovation, Social Impact, and Regulation: Do We Need New Paradigms?, Salzburg, Austria It is a pleasure to be back in Salzburg again for the next chapter in the Global Seminar, focusing on financial technology innovations and the developing financial regulatory framework.1At this same gathering last year, we discussed the potential evolution of the bank regulatory framework in response to the banking stress during the spring of 2023. At that time, we were taking stock of the regulatory reforms implemented after the 2008 financial crisis and evaluating whether those reforms—and the resulting bank regulatory and supervisory framework we have now—were effective and efficient, and whether improvements may be appropriate. Of course, many of those conversations are ongoing in the United States, with proposals—in varying levels of formality—under discussion, including new and expanded long-term debt requirements for non-global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), new liquidity requirements, and a host of other supervisory and regulatory reforms. These are in addition to other regulatory reform matters, including Basel III capital reforms and changes to the G-SIB surcharge framework, that are not directly related to the 2023 banking stress. Policy reforms in the United States, at times and to varying degrees, have arguably suffered from a lack of appropriate prioritization and focus.2This trend has been evident recently, when one considers the sheer volume of reforms that have recently been completed, that have been proposed, or that are in the pipeline. Often shortchanged in the rush to implement reforms are considerations of effectiveness and efficiency—effectiveness in addressing identified shortcomings, and efficiency in providing solutions that address these shortcomings without imposing unnecessary costs or compliance burdens or resulting in unintended consequences. While much of the reform agenda in the United States has been focused on the response to the 2023 banking stress, in my view, we also need to consider whether we have an appropriate bank regulatory and supervisory framework when it comes to innovation. So, today I would like to discuss how we can create a regulatory environment that fosters successful innovation. I will focus my remarks on the United States, specifically innovation within the "regulatory perimeter" in which regulated institutions—banks, holding companies, and their affiliates—operate. However, I think this approach has broader relevance for how regulation can more effectively support and promote innovation, including internationally. The implications of our regulatory approach go beyond just the banking system. A reflexive "no" from regulators can encourage activity to migrate out of the banking system. The result could be decreased transparency, lower regulatory standards, and increased risks to financial stability. We tend to think that the "stakes" are confined to a particular technology or innovation, but this is a misleading approach. Instead, we should adopt a broader approach that considers financial system stability. To implement a successful "same activity, same risk, same regulation" approach requires either broad-based legislation to coordinate these standards or an effective interagency approach that incorporates regulators beyond traditional banking regulators. Benefits of InnovationIn my experience, regulators love innovation—in the abstract. The idea of innovation is an alluring one. Among other things, innovation can help develop a faster and more efficient banking and payments system, it can lower the cost and expand the availability of products and services to consumers and businesses, it can improve the speed and reduce counterparty risk of securities transactions, and it can promote market competition. And we see evidence all around in the banking system where innovation has had transformative effects: we have automated teller machines (ATMs) that allow ready access to cash and basic account services, we have the ability to make electronic payments at merchants both in-person and online, and almost every bank customer can access their bank account or transfer money to a friend by using only their mobile phone. When innovation becomes commonplace, and with the passage of time, we lose sight of the long and sometimes tortured road these innovators traveled to introduce and embed them into customer expectations for banking services. I see a common theme between innovation as an abstract idea and "established" innovation that has become the new norm in the financial landscape—namely, that neither of these versions force us to confront the risks of the unknown. The abstract version does not force us to confront its practical implications, including: How does it work? What benefits could it bring? What risks does it present, and how will those risks be managed? Similarly, by the point at which the innovation becomes widely adopted and accepted, hopefully we have done the difficult work. We have come to understand the challenges it presents and have accepted the tradeoffs between the benefits, and the associated risks and costs, of allowing the new technology or process improvement to be introduced into the banking system. When we think about the abstract, or look back on successful innovation, we lose sight of the unique path forged to ensure its success. Many of the technologies that we will discuss during this conference have the potential to bring benefits, including greater efficiency to banking and payments. So how do we create an environment that allows innovation to flourish and in which regulated banking institutions are able to play a role? In the past I have spoken about three principles that I believe are necessary building blocks to fostering innovation: developing an understanding of the technology, having an open approach to innovation, and making innovation a priority in the development of regulatory frameworks.3I would like to revisit these principles today. Understanding InnovationAs a threshold matter, regulators and innovators share some responsibilities when it comes to innovation. Regulators must work hard to understand the functionality of new innovation, including the benefits innovation can bring and its accompanying risks. Regulators must not fall into the trap of complacency. Comfort with the known and familiar risks of how things have always been done can present a barrier. Regulators must be willing to thoughtfully consider the possibilities of innovation within the regulated banking system. At the same time, innovators must be committed to sharing their understanding and knowledge of innovation with regulators. But in doing so, innovators must not adopt the "sales" mentality that they may use when pitching investors or partners, and instead, acknowledge the unknowns—the risks that new technology presents, the various ways that the technology could be used or evolve over time, and how the technology could either complement or disrupt the current financial system. Going a step further, they may be best positioned to propose how regulators can best develop a regulatory framework to manage these risks. This deeper level of understanding may assist regulators in their responsibility to consider how innovation could impact different financial sectors, from small banks to wholesale financial markets, and how those impacts may ultimately affect end users. Of course, regulators must also consider not only the intended objectives of innovation, but they must also anticipate and understand the unintended consequences. Within the broad category of "understanding" innovation, I see three critical steps that regulators must take: understand the technology and landscape, recognize the use case for the technology, and anticipate the consequences. Each of these is a necessary ingredient for accepting the technology and developing a regulatory framework that effectively fosters innovation. Understanding technology and the landscapeAt its most basic level, many innovations involve a technological component and are situated in a landscape of different parties who may play a role in the use of the technology. Take for example, distributed ledger technology (DLT), including blockchain, which is the backbone of some innovations that are being explored in the financial system. DLT highlights the challenges presented to regulators in understanding innovation. There are many variations in the application of DLT—with ongoing research and development creating more variability over time—which ultimately may complicate understanding how the technology can be used and how different functionality can be incorporated into DLT solutions for different use cases. DLT provides a way for parties to record transfers of digital assets without the need for any centralized authority and relies on multiple participants who coordinate to maintain a synchronized version of the "ledger." DLT combines a number of different design elements—like distributed data storage, cryptography, and consensus mechanisms—that support the transfer process, information visibility, and transaction recordkeeping. These design elements can be combined in a number of different ways, and different parties may play a role in its ultimate use. Understanding technology is an important first step, but regulators also need to be confident in the players who operate in a particular innovative space. Banks of all sizes have a long history of innovation. And the many nonbank providers in this space, including core service providers, often hold the "keys" to innovation when they facilitate the add-on of new technology to core systems. There are also fintechs that may focus on even more transformational uses of technology, in ways that can affect all aspects of banking. Many of the parties involved in financial innovation describe themselves as financial system "disruptors." This may be an apt word to describe some of their ambitions, but it is certainly one that proves the need for a deliberate and cautious approach to regulation. The broad range of participants involved in this space presents another layer of complication. It is especially important for regulators to be able to distill the reality from the prototype hype to achieve a comprehensive understanding necessary to inform a policy viewpoint and ultimately an effective regulatory framework. Understanding the use caseApart from understanding the technology, and who may use it, regulators also need to clearly understand the use case—what existing problem does this technology solve? What are the costs and benefits, and are there tradeoffs policymakers would need to consider if the new technology were introduced or integrated in the existing financial system? DLT has inspired new ways of thinking about the exchange of assets and data, in addition to the role of intermediaries and trusted third parties. And of course, as will be discussed during this conference, artificial intelligence, or "AI," is increasingly discussed for its transformative potential not only in banking, but also in the broader world economy. While innovation can take many forms, from the regulatory perspective, it is helpful to understand how innovation fits—or could fit—into the existing financial system. Does innovation meet customer demands for cheaper or new and innovative products? Does it operate in the background to reduce both the incidence and cost of fraud? Does it lower the cost of basic banking services or improve financial inclusion? Does it allow banks to do a better job evaluating the creditworthiness of their customers and make safer loans? The "use case" is important because it helps to define the parameters around any particular innovation. Instead of saying the innovation is AI, or tokenization, or DLT, what is it exactly? How does it work? What technology underpins it, and what constraints would be placed on its use? Does its implementation rely on external participants or third parties to accomplish its use? Who has ultimate control over, and responsibility for, the function of the product or service? Understanding the consequencesWhile understanding both the technology behind a new innovation and its use case is important, these steps alone are not sufficient. Regulators must also understand, to the extent possible, the consequences of specific innovations. Take, for example, the increasing interest in tokenization. There is a risk that tokenized products and platforms could duplicate existing bank deposits and payment rails, potentially creating parallel systems. How would these parallel systems interact with, or even replace, current systems? Will the products and platforms that duplicate these deposit and payment functions provide the same legal protections for customers and the overall financial system that they currently receive? In the long run, the goal of financial innovation is to integrate the new technology into the fabric of the financial system. To do so in a responsible way, we need to understand the effects the technology will have, including the risks and consequences of introducing it, and the risks and consequences of its wide adoption in the financial system. It is not my intent to downplay the difficulty of understanding new developments that could change key activities, technology, products, or processes within the financial system. We are in an era of rapid change, and there are a wide range of innovations that may play an important role in the future of the financial system. But within the regulatory perimeter of the banking system, we need to be cautious about the risks of new technology, not only to the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions, but also to financial stability concerns. Openness to InnovationEarlier I mentioned the importance of ensuring the regulator understands the new technology. But while education is an important first step, it often runs headlong into regulatory skepticism. Often, a regulator's first reaction to proposed innovation in the banking system is not one of openness and acceptance but rather suspicion and concern. The use of emerging technology and innovation may require a change in policy or supervisory approach. It also very often requires regulatory feedback—ideally before the innovation is introduced or after it has been integrated by a bank and is reviewed during the supervisory process. To be sure, skepticism is an understandable first reaction to new activities, particularly those that someone seeks to conduct within the regulatory perimeter after its integration. For regulators, the challenge is one of balance. How do we allow innovation to flourish, with sensible supervision and regulation, so that our financial system can reap the gains of innovation while preserving safety and soundness and consumer compliance? Regulators need to ask whether we have considered the intended and unintended outcomes of a new innovation, and do the benefits of the new technology outweigh its risks? Would the introduction of a new technology or innovation in the banking system require updating our regulatory framework to incorporate clear oversight? Who should have responsibility for oversight, and what roles do we see for different regulators at both the state and federal level? Transformational technology requires clear, consistent, and transparent guardrails and expectations to govern the activities that are allowed into the regulated financial system. Where current regulation does not contemplate a new activity, should it be acceptable for financial agencies to regulate the activity through supervision and enforcement alone? Or should congressional action address the treatment of these activities in the financial system? I think it is vital that regulators work with banks through all stages of the innovation life cycle to achieve that baseline understanding I mentioned before. But it is incumbent on regulators to fight the temptation to say "no" and resist new technology and instead focus on solutions—how can we mitigate the risk of new technology? What benefits will technology bring to the financial system? How can we provide clear regulatory expectations? I would suggest that adopting a posture receptive to innovation requires a shift in regulatory approach. The current temptation is to pre-judge financial innovation and to take a harsh view. But this resistance approach carries significant risks. One of the most important risks is that financial innovation stagnates or is pushed out of—and kept out of—the banking system. Eliminating innovation could result in significant harm to the stability of the financial system and in terms of limiting the role of banking in the economy. Ultimately, this approach could lead to a banking system that may be safer and smaller but also much less effective in providing banking products and services to support the U.S. economy. In developing this regulatory "openness," I think it is important to acknowledge the shortcomings of our regulatory posture. This requires looking beyond the most immediate impacts on the banking system and considering the broader effects on the financial system. Hostility to innovationwithinthe banking system often results in activity migratingoutsideof the banking system. This is not an elimination of the underlying risk of these activities. They remain in the financial system but are often subject to less transparency and less regulation than the same activities conducted by banks. There have been a number of examples in which regulatory approach has driven activity outside the banking industry, thereby creating different and less transparent risks. Take for example mortgage servicing rights. In May, the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council released a report on nonbank mortgage servicing, documenting the growth of nonbank mortgage servicing since 2008, and the potential vulnerabilities that these servicers pose, vulnerabilities that could manifest as shocks to the U.S. financial system. As noted in the materials announcing this report, nonbank mortgage companies had servicing rights on 4 percent of U.S. mortgage balances in 2008; by 2022, this percentage had risen to 54 percent.4The rapid shift of such activity out of banks and into nonbank mortgage companies should surprise no one, as this was a predictable result of post-2008 regulatory reforms that made it more costly for these activities to be conducted by banks. But equally unsurprising (in my view) is that this shift did not insulate the U.S. financial system from the risks of these activities. The U.S. mortgage industry in the United States is very large—shifting which entities are favored to conduct these activities merely transferred the risk to less-regulated entities. The mortgages did not disappear, nor did the underlying activities necessary to support this market. Innovation as a Priority in the Regulatory and Supervisory AgendaFinancial innovation must be a core regulatory priority, in the sense that we must devote regulatory and supervisory resources and attention to building a framework that permits responsible innovation to flourish. Our approach must shift from reactive to active and one that facilitates innovation. Regulators must also promote innovation through transparency and open communication, ideally demonstrating a willingness to engage during the development process and within a restricted environment for experimentation. Shifting to a more tangible example, in some instances there are policy reasons for regulatory hesitation. In the past, I have spoken about cross-border payments as one area that has historically presented many frictions that, at least in theory, could be improved with new innovations and technology. This challenge involves achieving the goal to serve new types of customers and increase the speed of payments without losing or diluting important compliance safeguards that deter criminal activity. Some perceived payment frictions exist for specific policy reasons, not because of issues with existing technology. Therefore, new technology alone cannot solve a particular issue unless it also incorporates the required safeguards. The challenge is not just understanding innovative solutions to address cross-border payments, but also understanding how the framework itself could or should adjust in the face of innovation. Regulators can serve a valuable role in identifying where a technology solution may have an important "gap," as in the case of cross-border payments, by identifying how a solution can meet the needs of both customers and regulators. Innovation and regulatory and legal requirements can coexist—providing both enhanced capability and regulatory compliance. Transparency itself can promote innovation. Our goal should be to develop—and continually invest in—building and supporting a clear and sensible regulatory framework. One that allows the private sector to innovate while also maintaining appropriate safeguards. A clear regulatory framework supports private-sector innovators by providing the clarity and consistency that encourage long-term business investment in pursing innovation, while continuing to support today's products and services. A clear regulatory framework empowers supervisors to focus on safety and soundness, while also ensuring a safe and efficient payment system. The best way to build a regulatory system that is receptive to new financial technologies and innovations is to build on what has been effective in the past. This includes providing clear guidance to banks and the broader public, incorporating innovation into the regulatory agenda in a comprehensive way, and encouraging interaction between industry and regulators. This industry–regulator interaction must allow for feedback and information sharing throughout the innovation life cycle and incorporate regulatory feedback on innovation. There is more that can be done to accomplish this. While we should expand opportunities for regulators to provide clear, actionable, and timely feedback on innovation proposals, we should also consider developing regulatory "sandboxes," those designed to allow some degree of testing and experimentation. We should also ensure our regulatory staff understands and appreciates the value of responsible new technologies, so they may contribute to crafting a sensible regulatory approach to financial innovation. The more that regulators understand innovation, the more comfortable they will be in accepting and promoting its adoption in the financial system. As part of this framework, we also must consider the broader financial system. The "regulatory perimeter" between regulated banks and other parts of the financial system is a permeable barrier, and not only can activities shift between the two—as we saw with the migration of mortgage servicing in the United States—butriskcan shift between the two as well. As our financial system has grown and become more complex over time, it has also become much more interconnected. Banks often have direct exposure to activities and risks that occur in other parts of the financial system. Even when they do not have direct exposures, they may have indirect exposures to financial stability risks originating in other parts of the financial system. Closing ThoughtsThe most unfortunate approach to innovation would be to simply prohibit it, or to impose such onerous standards that effectively discourage innovation or prevent it from developing and flourishing. This approach would not only decrease the importance and relevance of the banking system, but it could also generate new financial stability risks as activity migrates to areas with lower regulatory standards and less transparency. Broadly speaking, the regulatory framework should be dynamic, one that can and should accommodate new technology and services. Where the same underlying activity presents the same risk, there is a strong case to be made for imposing the same type of regulation. But we must successfully balance the standards that protect households and businesses and prohibit criminal and other illicit financial activity with maintaining the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions and the stability of the broader financial system. We must also prioritize working on a whole-of-government approach to ensure we appropriately monitor and manage the risks of financial activity, no matter where those occur. As we continue to enhance our understanding, my hope is that we can strike a more receptive tone to financial innovation, in a way that enables a more innovative, efficient, and effective financial system for the future. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision andRegulation (PDF)" (speech at the New York Bankers Association's Financial Services Forum, Palm Beach, Florida, November 9, 2023); Michelle W. Bowman, "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Supervision (PDF)" (speech at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, Florida, February 27, 2024); Michelle W. Bowman, "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Supervision (PDF)" (speech at the New Jersey Bankers Association Annual Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, New Jersey, March 7, 2024).Return to text 3. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Innovation and the Evolving Financial Landscape (PDF)" (speech at The Digital Chamber DC Blockchain Summit 2024, Washington, D.C., May 15, 2024).Return to text 4. See U.S. Department of the Treasury, "The Financial Stability Oversight Council Releases Report on Nonbank Mortgage Servicing," press release, May 10, 2024.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At Celebrating 50 Years of the American Economic Association Summer Program, Washington, D.C. I am delighted to celebrate 50 years of the American Economic Association's Summer Program (AEASP) with you this evening.1This is a momentous achievement and an historic moment. Not only is the program's continued success a testament to the dedicated efforts of the various faculty, fellows, and administrators, but it is also a testament to the achievements and efforts of its students and alumni. I am incredibly proud of all of you, the program, and its legacy. As an alumna of the program at Stanford University, I was deeply humbled, honored, grateful, and proud to be named co-director and then director of the AEA Summer Program at Michigan State University (MSU) from 2016 to 2020. I am also honored to be the first woman to have served as director of the program and proud to have worked with such an extraordinary group of instructors, administrators, seminar speakers, graduate students, and partners from all over the country who sacrificed their summers and time throughout the year over five years to execute this program each summer. The leadership team—Thomas Jeitschko, Christine Moser (from Western Michigan University), Antonio Doblas-Madrid, Mary Wortley, and Kirstin Heard—were great colleagues and instrumental in implementing the program each year. Finally, I am eternally grateful to the staff and leadership of the American Economic Association, who provided critical infrastructure, funding, and guidance; the National Science Foundation for its investment in training economists and in the future of economics; the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, our consummate host during our visit to Chicago each summer; the Board of Governors and individual Federal Reserve Banks for their support; and Western Michigan University, the co-sponsor of the program with MSU. I would like to share with you just a few lessons I learned while leading the AEASP at MSU. Although the program's main priority is to teach courses that will encourage and prepare students to pursue further study in economics, I would like to highlight a few other features that I think led to success. First, two key features of the AEASP team and program at MSU were humility and agility. As many of the former directors here know well, every program is a startup when it moves from one university to another. While we started with a detailed plan for all five years, we did not know how everything would turn out and had to be open to experimentation and innovation. After the first year, it became obvious that the program needed a systematic advising component. Armed with this intensive training in economics, the students still needed help planning next steps back at their home institutions and for the future. The second year, we instituted a mandatory advising session with a faculty administrator on the last day of the program. The students completed a survey with their educational objectives for the next two to three years, and we commented on them. This became a critical and ongoing souvenir of the program. It has been heartwarming to see program alumni stick to these plans and execute them many years after leaving the AEASP. During the second year, we also realized how important machine learning was becoming to conducting research and to preparing for graduate study in economics. One August, after the program was over, we enrolled in a machine learning short course, learned more about the power of these tools, and incorporated it into the program the next summer. Humility, agility, and being open to new ideas held us in good stead throughout the program in East Lansing. Second, outreach and recruiting efforts are very important. My own journey and that of many others are evidence that not everyone comes to the field of economics the same way. In our experience, it was helpful to find novel ways to broaden our reach. In addition to traditional outreach methods, we engaged social media, including going to where economists were—EconTwitter—to introduce economics departments and interested students to the new program at MSU, to provide general information, and to give updates on students, program activities, and alumni. There were several memorable social media events: Two live social media sessions on different platforms, the Instagram photo contest, and the "Selfies with Sue" [Dynarski] sessions during our excursion to Detroit and Ann Arbor. Successful execution of a social-media strategy resulted in a more diverse applicant pool by type of educational institution and geographical location. Third, anyone can be a mentor and influence the trajectory of a student or young scholar interested in economics. Students spontaneously became peer mentors to each other, using time they could have used to do their own problem sets or study for their own exams to mentor a student struggling in a course or grappling with misgivings about the path to a PhD instead. Fellows (TAs) came from all over the country and from a variety of economics programs to support the AEASP students and each other as participants in the dissertation brown bag seminar. Instructors, some of whom came from a plethora of other institutions, like Western Michigan University and Barnard College, gave 110 percent to the program and mentored students inside and beyond the classroom, as well as beyond the program. Finally, it was extraordinary, if not moving, to witness so many economists from many different subfields and from around the country come forward and volunteer to be research mentors for the students, especially during the pandemic. I was grateful for all these important mentoring relationships that were forged, that made a substantial contribution to the program, and that demonstrated that anyone at any stage of their career in economics could be a mentor. Before concluding, I want to take the opportunity to recognize my classmate at Berkeley, gifted and prolific economic theorist, friend, and mentor, Gary Charness. Gary was a dedicated instructor in the AEASP at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and provided very helpful advice as we got the MSU program up and running. He also embodied the notion that people come to economics in different ways, as I mentioned earlier, having had a full career before undertaking graduate work in economics. He passed away last month; otherwise, given his legendary commitment to the program, I believe he would have been here to celebrate with us. In closing, as an alumna and former director, I feel great joy witnessing the success of the AEASP students and alumni, with many having enrolled in economics PhD programs and others having pursued master's degrees or taken research jobs, including at the Board of Governors and elsewhere in the Federal Reserve System. AEASP alumni also have received National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowships and other competitive fellowships for graduate study. I hope that current AEASP students and alumni will continue not only their own research efforts but also their connections with each other and with a broader network of mentors and alumni. Congratulations, again, on a half century of the AEA Summer Program! I am honored to have been a part of this important initiative and wonderful event. I am beyond grateful to Marcus Alexis, James Tobin, Andrew Brimmer, Robert Dorfman, Charles Schultze, George Borts, and all of the other founders and early supporters of the program for their vision and to the National Economic Association and all those who have contributed to advocating for and executing this vision over the years. With great pride for its past achievements, I look forward to seeing the program's legacy embodied in the future endeavors of each of its participants. Best of luck over the next 50 years! 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Thank you, Barbara. It is a fitting time to be speaking again to the Economic Club of New York, because this month marks two years since my first Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting.1At that meeting, we kicked off a series of large interest-rate increases, all of which I supported, because I am fully committed to bringing inflation sustainably back to our 2 percent target. As I said when I joined the Board, I care about both sides of the dual mandate Congress gives us, maximum employment and price stability. When inflation was well above target and the unemployment rate was historically low, we prioritized restoring price stability. Over the past year, inflation has slowed, and labor market tightness has eased, such that the risks to achieving our inflation and employment goals have moved toward better balance. I think now is a good time to assess how the economy has evolved after rates have held steady at a restrictive level for nearly a year. Today, I will provide a progress report on disinflation, give you my outlook on the economy, and share my views on how to ensure that monetary policy brings inflation fully back to 2 percent over time while being attentive to the risk of a slowing labor market. I will conclude my remarks with a few words about my role as chair of the Board's Financial Stability Committee. InflationAs the U.S. and global economy recovered from the pandemic, rebounding demand came up against still-constrained supply, and inflation rose to the highest level in many years. In the past two years, 12-month inflation in the PCE price index has fallen from a peak above 7 percent to 2.7 percent in April, and it likely moved a bit lower in May based on consumer and producer price data. However, after rapid disinflation in the second half of last year, progress has slowed this year. My focus remains on making sure inflation is on a path to return sustainably to 2 percent. How do I think about making that determination? To respond, I think it is helpful to look at the underlying data. Some price components have clearly improved. Food and energy price increases moderated significantly over the past two years as global commodity supplies recovered from the shock of Russia's February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. When excluding often-volatile food and energy costs, 12-month inflation in core goods prices is down from 7.6 percent in early 2022, returning to the trend of slightly negative inflation observed before the pandemic. The increased availability of computer chips and other material inputs led to a recovery in motor vehicle production and, along with restraint in aggregate demand, likely reduced supply–demand imbalances for durable goods, more generally. Inflation in services, a spending category that accounts for about two-thirds of household budgets, has slowed significantly, though it remains noticeably above pre-pandemic rates. Specifically, housing services inflation has eased quite gradually, as it takes time for the moderation of increases in market rent—what a landlord charges a new tenant—to show through to broader measures of shelter costs. One possible explanation is that landlords raise rents for existing tenants only gradually over several years and are still moving those rents closer to the market rate. Outside of housing, 12-month services inflation slowed over the course of last year from above 5 percent to below 3.5 percent but has stalled near that rate this year. That is still about 1 percentage point above the average pace during the two years before the pandemic. Some of the largest contributors to recent services inflation are imputed prices, including portfolio management fees that are affected by equity price increases. Other components of services inflation that are more reflective of supply and demand conditions in the economy have continued to ease. Prices of hotel stays, airline tickets, and restaurant meals are illustrative. I expect that the longer-run disinflation trend will continue as interest rates weigh on demand. Anecdotal reports, including from the Fed's Beige Book, suggest consumers are pushing back on price increases. Several national retailers have announced plans to lower prices on certain items, and there is increasing evidence that higher-income shoppers are trading down to discount stores. Two other important factors supporting this trend are well-anchored long-term inflation expectations and short-term inflation expectations falling back to near pre-pandemic levels. My forecast is that three- and six-month inflation rates will continue to move lower on a bumpy path, as consumers' resistance to price increases is reflected in the inflation data. I expect 12-month inflation will roughly move sideways for the rest of this year, with monthly data likely similar to the favorable readings during the second half of last year. Beyond that, I see inflation slowing more sharply next year, with housing-services inflation declining to reflect the past slowing in rents on new leases, core goods inflation remaining slightly negative, and inflation in core services excluding housing easing over time. Labor MarketTurning to the other side of our dual mandate, the labor market has largely returned to a better alignment between supply and demand. Many indicators suggest the job market is roughly where it was before the pandemic—tight but not overheated. The unemployment rate was a still-low 4 percent in May, but it has gradually risen over the past year since touching a more than half-century low of 3.4 percent in April 2023. Last month's rate was also modestly above readings just before the pandemic took hold. Layoffs remain low, and payroll growth has been solid so far this year, adding an average of 248,000 jobs a month, essentially matching last year's pace. Labor supply has expanded, partly reflecting a rise in immigration. Labor force participation has broadly rebounded from pandemic lows, except for those aged 65 or older. Women between the ages of 25 and 54 led the rebound, with their participation reaching 78.1 percent in May, the highest ever recorded. With more workers entering the economy, the monthly job gains needed to keep the unemployment rate steady likely has risen from just under 100,000 to nearly 200,000. Although these estimates are uncertain, such a breakeven pace may be a bit higher than the true pace of recent job gains, when taking into account data from the Quarterly Census for Employment and Wages. These data suggest that payroll job gains were overstated last year and may continue to be so this year. Thus, even the robust payroll numbers are consistent with a tight, but not overheating, labor market. Signs of better balance in the labor market have come into focus. For example, the ratio of job vacancies to unemployment has fallen from a high of 2.0 in mid-2022 to 1.2 in April, in line with its pre-pandemic level. Workers are also less likely to leave their current jobs in search of new ones. The quits rate has fallen from 3.0 percent in April 2022 to 2.2 percent this April and is now below its 2019 average. This decline suggests a normalization following a period of high churn. Wage growth is outpacing inflation but is also moderating. Data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta show that the wage-growth differential between job changers and stayers has narrowed. Wage growth reflected in postings from online job boards, such as Indeed, has returned to pre-pandemic levels. These measures tend to adjust quickly to changes in labor market conditions. Economic ActivityTurning to the broader picture, the U.S. economy has rebounded robustly since the short but deep pandemic recession. Overall, gross domestic product (GDP) growth eased in the first quarter from the rate at the end of last year. However, much of the first-quarter weakness was in net exports and inventories, noisy components from which I do not take much signal, while growth in private domestic final purchases remained solid. Going forward, I expect economic growth to remain near the rate of potential growth, somewhat above 2 percent, which is boosted by the increase in the size of the labor force. American consumers have driven the current expansion, bolstered by strong income growth. But recent data, including first-quarter household spending and retail sales for April and May, suggest that growth is slowing. And, in April, the total amount of credit-card balances and other types of revolving consumer debt declined for the first time since 2021. Signs of strain continue to emerge among consumers with low-to-moderate incomes, as their liquid savings and access to credit have increasingly become exhausted. Credit-card delinquency ison an upward trend, and therate at which auto loans are transitioning into delinquency is at a 13-year high. These rates are not yet concerning for the overall economy but bear watching. Offsetting some of the slowing in consumer spending, investment spending for equipment and intangibles, such as intellectual property and software, has been strong this year. After growing at about only a 1 percent pace last year, equipment and intangibles spending grew at a more than 4 percent annual rate in the first quarter. If that strength continues, it has the potential to increase productivity over time. Productivity growth is one factor that could change the path of both the expansion and inflation. Last year's GDP growth of 3.1 percent came alongside more moderate employment gains, implying strong growth in productivity. The economy may have benefited from investment undertaken in response to strong demand when the labor market was tight. Productivity growth is volatile and difficult to measure, but if it remains strong, then a faster pace of economic growth might not be inflationary. While the pace of gains may have cooled from last year, I still lean toward optimism on innovation and productivity. Looking ahead, I see adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) technology as a potentially significant source of productivity growth, keeping in mind that breakthroughs, such as effective generative AI, will take time to fully reach their potential and disseminate throughout the economy and for complementary investment to bear fruit. Monetary PolicyConsidering the full view of economic data available at the time, my colleagues on the FOMC and I decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent when we met earlier this month. I believe our current monetary policy stance is restrictive, putting downward pressure on aggregate demand in the economy. With disinflation continuing, albeit at a slower pace this year, and the labor market having largely normalized, I see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as having moved toward better balance. Given our data dependence, we will closely monitor incoming information to determine the future path of policy. Returning inflation sustainably to our 2 percent target is an ongoing process and not a fait accompli. In considering how restrictive policy is, I look at a broad range of indicators from financial and credit markets. For instance, the two-year real rate, derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS, remains around 2.7 percent, up from an average of about 1/2 percent in the couple of years before the pandemic, while the 30-year mortgage rate is around 7 percent. Meanwhile, banks have significantly tightened credit standards over the past two years. In particular, small businesses and some small banks and community development financial institutions are experiencing diminished access to credit. Many of these businesses also face short-duration loans that need to be refinanced at higher interest rates. With rising delinquencies, a number of low-to-moderate-income households are also likely experiencing diminished access to credit. On the other hand, the largest firms and the largest banks do not report a lack of access to funding. Larger firms, like many homeowners, were able to lock in low interest rates for longer terms a few years ago, before rates rose. Of course, the economic outlook is always uncertain. One way to address such uncertainty is to consider a range of scenarios and not just the baseline forecast. One scenario is the possibility that persistently high inflation durably increases inflation expectations. While this appears less likely than a year or two ago, I am very attentive to the evolution of inflation expectations. Such a risk would imply keeping monetary policy restrictive for longer. Another scenario would be that the economy and labor market weaken more sharply than expected in my baseline forecast. In that case, monetary policy would need to respond to such a threat to the employment side of the dual mandate. Considering the balance of risks related to these scenarios, I believe that our current policy is well positioned to respond as needed to any changes in the economic outlook. With significant progress on inflation and the labor market cooling gradually, at some point it will be appropriate to reduce the level of policy restriction to maintain a healthy balance in the economy. The timing of any such adjustment will depend on how economic data evolve and what they imply for the economic outlook and balance of risks. Financial StabilityBefore I conclude, I would like to say a few words about the financial system's resilience. Following the 2007–09 financial crisis, a broad set of reforms was put in place to bolster financial stability. To ensure an ongoing focus on that area, the Board established its Committee on Financial Stability as a venue to discuss related developments and policy issues. Earlier this year, I became the chair of this committee. Consistent with some easing of financial conditions since late last year, valuations for some asset categories have risen. Home prices, for example, have outstripped rent gains for several years. That leaves measures such as the price-to-rent ratio high relative to historical averages. Yet, these valuations have not led to an appreciable increase in risk-taking. While house prices have been growing rapidly, mortgage debt has not, and most households have ample equity cushions. As I said earlier, some households are experiencing financial strain, and rising delinquency rates suggest some caution. Borrowing by businesses and households has been expanding at rates below GDP growth for several years. I use the ratios of their debt levels to GDP as a rough proxy of whether the sectors are overleveraged, and those stand well below pre-pandemic levels. Financial institutions and markets also appear broadly robust, with high capital and liquidity levels at the largest and most interconnected banks. While there is less visibility into nonbank financial institutions, this tightening cycle has seen markets absorb a number of risk events, suggesting that leverage does not appear too great. A subset of banks has a high concentration of commercial real estate (CRE) loans, and supervisors are working closely with those banks. As the CRE market adapts to the shifting preference for downtown office space, prices for some buildings will likely continue to fall, and more loans will need to be worked out as they come due. However, markets have broadly taken the bumps in stride so far, without notable spillovers. In sum, I see a system that has some vulnerabilities but also important sources of resilience and, on balance, is not currently positioned to unusually amplify any future shock. A stable and resilient financial system is critical to the well-being of households and firms, allowing them to access credit, and it is essential for the Federal Reserve to achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Thank you. It is a pleasure to be back at the Economic Club of New York. I look forward to continuing our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Midwest Cyber Workshop hosted by the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Chicago, and Kansas City, St. Louis, Missouri Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good afternoon and welcome to the 2nd annual Midwest Cyber Workshop hosted by the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis.1This workshop was launched last year to further the conversation on cyber risks between community bankers, regulators, law enforcement, and industry stakeholders. It is an honor to be a part of this workshop again and to kickoff this year's event. Cybersecurity continues to be a key risk area for the banking industry and for regulators. Cyber-related events, including ransomware attacks and business email compromises, are extremely costly and time-consuming experiences. For community banks, maintaining the necessary resources and technology to support a successful cybersecurity program can feel especially challenging and financially burdensome. The evolving nature of cyberthreats requires banks to continually review and enhance processes and procedures to protect, detect, and respond to an incident, even if the operating environment has not significantly changed. Ten years ago, immutable backups and multifactor authentication on privileged access accounts were not common controls deployed by community banks. Today, they are considered to be standard elements of a cyber risk management strategy. Financial industry vendors and service providers add an additional layer of cyber-related vulnerability. Attacks on these third parties have enabled bad actors to create operational incidents and breaches of customer information at financial institutions. Effectively managing and monitoring third-party relationships is an essential component of a bank's broader risk management function. Given the increased adoption of cloud-based solutions, outsourcing of critical functions, and exploration of the use of artificial intelligence (AI), banks must have robust strategies for cyber resilience. Generative AI has the potential to transform operations and the customer experience. But it is also vulnerable to cyberthreats and will require an ongoing analysis of risk-identification and -management. Last year, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency jointly issued new guidance titled "Interagency Guidance on Third-Party Relationships: Risk Management," which was recently supplemented by a community bank guide meant to assist these banks in tailoring their third-party risk management programs. Later this afternoon, you will hear more on this from our panel of IT examiners on these resources, recent observations from the field, and risks associated with AI. Ransomware attacks continue to target individuals, businesses, and governments across the country and often result in significant financial and operational harm. Combating ransomware requires that an organization make investments in people, processes, and technology. Often, these attacks are successful because well-intentioned staff have their guard down, or they are not effectively trained to identify and respond to a potential incident. Employees can be your greatest strength, but also your weakest link when it comes to protecting digital assets. That's why it is critical that cyberprograms are built upon a solid foundation that includes training staff to quickly respond to suspicious activity. This reinforces the importance of a skeptical approach in helping to safeguard information. Today and tomorrow, Federal Reserve staff, law enforcement, and industry stakeholders will share their perspectives on ransomware incidents, including restoration of key payments-related functions, cyberinsurance, payments-related risks, and financial considerations during an incident. Finally, a cybersecurity program would not be complete without a comprehensive testing and exercise plan. By incorporating regular testing, a bank can identify strengths and weaknesses in their current strategies. They can then leverage this information to enhance resiliency, resulting in a higher level of preparedness when an incident occurs. Tabletop exercises like the one facilitated tomorrow with IBM are an excellent way to test a cyberdefense strategy against multiple scenarios, including those involving a third party and payment systems. In closing, outreach events like this workshop, the February 2024 Ask the Fed® session with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, and our recent virtual "office hours" on the 2023 third-party risk management guidance enable us to connect and share resources. These opportunities help us to better support industry management of cybersecurity and other operational risks. I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis for organizing this event, and I hope you enjoy the workshop. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Policy Exchange, London, England I would like to thank Policy Exchange for the invitation to speak with you today.1Engagement abroad is essential for gaining a better understanding of the common forces shaping the global economy and financial system. It also promotes a better understanding of the drivers of differences between the economic and financial environments across countries and jurisdictions. My remarks will offer some perspectives on recent developments in monetary policy and bank regulatory policy—specifically, bank capital reform—in the U.S. These are two areas in which I am actively engaged as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Monetary PolicyI'll begin with monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the monetary policymaking body of the Federal Reserve System—has been keenly focused on restoring price stability following the surge in inflation during 2021 and in 2022 in the aftermath of the global COVID-19 pandemic. During this time, inflation reached levels not seen in the U.S. since the 1970s and 1980s. The high inflation experienced in the U.S. in the wake of the pandemic was also experienced in many economies around the world, reflecting, in part, the common global nature of the shocks that occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic. In many economies during the pandemic, supply constraints related to social-distancing measures, reduced labor supply, and supply chain disruptions, coupled with strong demand for goods as economies emerged from pandemic restrictions, acted as catalysts, pushing inflation up to very high levels. Aggregate demand was also supported by accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, which served to bolster the balance sheets of households, businesses, and local governments, and contributed to very tight labor markets. The global inflation experience since the pandemic was highly synchronized across the major world economies, reflecting similar shocks that acted to reduce supply, while fiscal and monetary policy interventions stimulated demand. Early in the pandemic, many economic sectors, especially in services, were affected by lockdowns and both mandatory and voluntary social distancing. Many workers also transitioned to working remotely. Aggressive fiscal policies helped support personal and business income, and monetary policy became highly accommodative. The large shift in the composition of demand toward goods resulted in rising supply bottlenecks and higher goods prices. Reduced immigration and lower labor force participation led to very tight labor markets as the economy reopened and demand recovered. Consumer spending was supported by excess savings accumulated from extraordinary fiscal support and reduced spending during lockdowns. Wage growth and services price inflation also picked up and have remained persistently elevated, reflecting a tight labor market and the protracted adjustment of prices and wages to the shocks during the pandemic. A sharp rise in food and energy price inflation, and their pass-through to core inflation, also contributed to a more synchronous inflation dynamic across major advanced foreign economies in recent years. Food and energy prices are mostly set in global markets, and their sharp increases also reflected the effects of Russia's invasion of Ukraine in early 2022, especially for major European economies including the U.K. Many central banks facing these dynamics tightened monetary policy in an effort to better balance demand and supply and to bring inflation back down to target. In the U.S., by late 2021, it became clear that the FOMC's monetary policy stance was too accommodative in the presence of growing inflationary pressures, due to broader and more persistent supply constraints, and that the Committee needed to move toward a tighter policy. It seems likely to me that the U.S. experience during the years leading up to the pandemic, when inflation was persistently low, made it hard for many to foresee how quickly that situation could change. Additionally, the domestic inflation and labor data did not accurately reflect the economic conditions prevailing at the time and were subsequently substantially revised.2 In my view, these factors, combined with new forward guidance introduced in the September and December 2020 FOMC statements following the revisions to the Committee's monetary policy strategy consensus statement in August 2020, contributed to a delay in the removal of monetary policy accommodation in 2021.3,4In late 2021, the FOMC did begin to move toward tightening the stance of monetary policy and, beginning in 2022, increased the policy rate rapidly to bring monetary policy into restrictive territory. Since March 2022, the FOMC has raised the target range of the federal funds rate by 5‑1/4 percentage points. The target range has remained at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent since July 2023. Since June 2022, the Federal Reserve has also been reducing its securities holdings, which had increased substantially during the pandemic period. The tightening in monetary policy has had an effect. Over 2023, we saw significant progress on lowering inflation in the U.S. while the economy and labor market have remained strong. The 12-month change in core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices slowed to 2.9 percent in December 2023, nearly 2 percentage points less than one year earlier. The restrictive stance of monetary policy reduced demand-side inflation pressures. Rising interest rates continued to act as a drag on growth of residential and business investment, outside of an increase in construction of new electric vehicle battery and microprocessor factories. Labor demand also moderated, contributing to some loosening of labor market tightness. The job openings and quits rates fell and payroll employment gains slowed significantly throughout last year.5 Some of the progress on inflation last year also reflected favorable supply-side developments, including the resolution of supply chain disruptions and increased labor supply—both from higher immigration and higher labor force participation of prime-age workers—as well as lower energy prices. Since the beginning of 2024, however, we have seen only modest further progress on inflation. The 12-month measures of total and core PCE inflation have moved roughly sideways or slightly down since December and remained elevated at 2.7 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, in April. The consumer price index (CPI) report for May showed 12-month core CPI inflation slowing to 3.4 percent from 3.6 percent in April. However, with average core CPI inflation this year through May running at an annualized rate of 3.8 percent, notably above average inflation in the second half of last year, I expect inflation to remain elevated for some time. Recent data suggest some moderation in economic activity early this year. First-quarter gross domestic product growth was slower than in the second half of last year, though private domestic final purchases continued to rise at a solid pace. Continued softness in consumer spending and weaker housing activity early in the second quarter also suggest less momentum in economic activity so far this year. Payroll employment continued to rise at a solid pace in April and May, though slightly slower than in the first quarter, partly reflecting increased immigrant labor supply. Despite some further rebalancing between supply and demand, the labor market remains tight. The unemployment rate edged up to 4.0 percent in May, while the number of job openings relative to unemployed workers declined further to near its pre-pandemic level. Labor force participation dropped back to 62.5 percent in May, which suggests no further improvement in labor supply along this margin, as labor force participation among those aged 55 or older has been persistently low. In contrast to the past two years, it is possible over the coming months that the path of monetary policy in the U.S. will diverge from that of other advanced economies, including the U.K., as the underlying economic developments and outlooks across jurisdictions exhibit greater heterogeneity. Inflation and labor market developments in the U.S. have unfolded differently in recent quarters compared to many other advanced economies, likely reflecting a more open immigration policy and significantly larger discretionary fiscal stimulus since the pandemic. Economic activity in the U.S. has recovered considerably more than in other advanced foreign economies, including in the U.K. This likely reflects higher levels of fiscal support and productivity growth in the U.S. compared to other major economies.6A more flexible labor market in the U.S. likely allowed for greater movement of workers across sectors following the COVID-19 shock, with higher unemployment in the early stages of the pandemic followed by stronger job creation during the recovery. A rebound in new business formation in the U.S. also likely enhanced productivity growth in recent years. With economic activity remaining weaker in other advanced foreign economies than in the U.S. and given differing economic and inflation outlooks in their own jurisdictions, central banks in these economies may ease monetary policy sooner or more quickly than in the U.S. Inflation in the U.S. remains elevated, and I still see a number of upside inflation risks that affect my outlook. First, it is unlikely that further supply-side improvements will continue to lower inflation going forward, as supply chains have largely normalized, the labor force participation rate has leveled off in recent months below pre-pandemic levels, and an open U.S. immigration policy that added millions of new immigrants in the U.S. over the past few years may become more restrictive. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, including the risk that spillovers from regional conflicts could disrupt global supply chains, putting additional upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices. There is also the risk that the loosening in financial conditions since last year, reflecting considerable gains in equity valuations, and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that increased immigration and continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. With labor markets remaining tight, wage growth has been elevated at around or above 4 percent, still higher than the pace consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal given trend productivity growth. In the U.S., the FOMC pursues monetary policy in support of price stability and maximum employment. These goals mandated to the Federal Reserve by the U.S. Congress are focused on domestic economic conditions. However, international economic and financial developments can influence U.S. monetary policy to the extent that these developments affect the economic outlook for the U.S. For example, weaker foreign activity and an appreciation of the dollar driven by easier monetary policy abroad would both reduce foreign demand for U.S. exports and lower the outlook for economic growth in the U.S. Likewise, geopolitical developments or trade restrictions could affect the outlook for the prices of energy, food, and goods. Looking ahead, I will be closely watching the incoming data as I assess whether monetary policy in the U.S. is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal over time. The extent and frequency of revisions to U.S. economic data since the pandemic have made the task of assessing the current state of the economy and the outlook even more challenging. My baseline outlook continues to be that U.S. inflation will return to the FOMC's 2 percent goal, with the target range of the federal funds rate held at its current level of 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent for some time. Should the incoming data indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower the federal funds rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. However, we are still not yet at the point where it is appropriate to lower the policy rate. In my view, we should consider a range of possible scenarios that could unfold when considering how the FOMC's monetary policy decisions may evolve. I remain willing to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a future meeting should progress on inflation stall or even reverse. Given the risks and uncertainties regarding my economic outlook, I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. Reducing our policy rate too soon or too quickly could result in a rebound in inflation, requiring further future policy rate increases to return inflation to 2 percent over the longer run. Bank Capital ReformI will now briefly touch on bank capital reforms, which are particularly important when it comes to our global and interconnected banking and financial systems. The U.S. has lagged its EU and U.K. counterparts in fully implementing the Basel III capital standards. In July 2023, the U.S. federal banking agencies issued a public consultation on implementing what we call the Basel III "endgame" capital reforms.7 The U.S. proposal was notable for a number of reasons, but I would highlight two in particular. First, the U.S. proposal would significantly expand the scope of application and calibration of these capital requirements. And, second, this proposal went beyond the Basel framework in several areas, undermining the goal of increasing consistency in capital standards across jurisdictions and potentially creating competitive concerns. The response to the U.S. capital proposal was overwhelmingly negative from a broad range of commenters. Calibration and scopeA key consideration in evaluating reform efforts is whether the benefits of a change outweigh the costs, both for the financial institutions subject to these reforms and for the broader economy. The benefits of reform, like Basel III, are clear—on a basic level, higher capital can make the banking system safer. At a minimum, this increased safety comes at a cost; in its more extreme forms, it can actually increase financial stability risks. The Basel III proposal in the U.S. is complex and, if it were to apply today as proposed, could have very significant, detrimental impacts. Federal Reserve staff estimated that the proposed changes would result in an aggregate 20 percent increase in total risk-weighted assets across bank holding companies subject to the rule, with some commenters projecting much greater effects.8And, instead of these standards applying only to large, internationally active banks, the U.S. proposal would "push down" these standards to a much broader range of domestic institutions. A change of this significance could impact U.S. market liquidity and lending as well as force firms that lack sufficient economies of scale to stop providing certain products and services. Capital increases of this scale could reduce the cost and availability of credit, particularly for certain types of loans, and could disproportionately harm underserved markets, businesses, and communities. In my view, the proposal insufficiently considered these direct costs. These are costs that would ultimately be imposed on bank customers. Of course, the evaluation of reforms should not end at their direct costs. Many of the costs are indirect or unintended and may be substantial, creating further concerns, including risks to financial stability. These reforms could create an exodus of activities and products from the banking system due to the indirect costs and unintended consequences. Over time, activity tends to migrate to where it can be conducted efficiently and at the least cost. Capital requirements can play a significant role in determining where and by whom an activity is conducted. Banks are often best positioned to provide financial products and services due to their expertise and experience as well as their requirement to operate safely and soundly. When the over-calibration of regulatory costs becomes too significant, activities often migrate out of banks and into the nonbank financial system, potentially leading to greater systemic risks. Up until this point, I have focused primarily on the "cost" side of the analysis, and I think it is fair to characterize the direct and indirect costs of the proposed Basel III rule as substantial. But we must also measure these costs against the benefits such capital increases could provide. As a starting point for this analysis, we must evaluate the current state of the banking system. In the U.S., given the increase in capital following the 2008 financial crisis, I do not see undercapitalization of large banks as a current vulnerability. While some have argued that large capital increases should be part of the regulatory response following the 2023 U.S. banking stress, I think this argument lacks a solid foundation. First, as we know, the Basel reforms were being developed long before last year's banking stress. The U.S. proposal included regulatory changes that had previously been considered and rejected as part of the Basel III implementation—specifically, a significant accounting change regarding the treatment of unrealized losses on securities portfolios.9While revisiting this one element of Basel III has been used to try tying the rulemaking initiative to the regulatory response to the bank failures last spring, the majority of the proposed changes are unrelated to last spring's banking stress. Second, linking this rulemaking to the banking stress implies that thecausesof individual bank failures in the spring of 2023 were in some way a signal of broader banking system weakness, which could best be addressed by significant capital increases. This argument seems to rely on the philosophy that more capital makes stronger banks, regardless of costs and tradeoffs, or possible more efficient approaches. Linking the proposed capital increases to the bank failures in the spring of 2023 should not be used as a pretext to avoid the challenges of identifying and evaluating the tradeoffs involved with setting capital requirements, nor should it excuse regulators from taking a hard look at the root causes of the bank failures with the goal of identifying more targeted solutions than across-the-board capital increases. In the case of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), both bank management and supervisors failed to appreciate, appropriately identify, and mitigate the known, significant, and idiosyncratic risks of a business model that relied on a highly concentrated, uninsured base of depositors. They also overlooked the buildup of interest rate risk without appropriate risk management. These management failures arguably support an honest and critical look at how supervision was conducted in the lead-up to the firm's failure. And it would then be appropriate to propose changes to remediate those deficiencies. But the failures did not suggest either that "capital" was the major problem contributing to SVB's failure or that undercapitalization was a broader problem in the banking system. Basel III capital reforms andinternational consistencyBefore discussing the path ahead, I will also address one of the factors that should be a focus for regulatory reforms that may resonate in this forum: the issue of international comparability and competitive disadvantages. One of the primary purposes of the Basel capital standards is to promote minimum standards across jurisdictions that not only improve competitive equity in banking markets, but also result in making the financial system safer. While I have expressed some skepticism of the U.S. Basel III proposal, I see value in engaging in ongoing discussions about international coordination through multilateral organizations like the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Some degree of consistency in international banking and financial markets can be helpful in fostering a cross-border level playing field for internationally active banking organizations while establishing minimum standards that can help mitigate global financial stability risks. In internationally active banking and financial markets, there are often "choices" about where activity can be conducted. Financial products and services are offered around the world in different markets, and there is often some degree of flexibility as to how a customer can access a product or service. This competitive "choice" aspect of international banking and financial markets can itself create downward pressure on regulatory standards and create opportunities for forum shopping. In the absence of some degree of international coordination, there is a risk of creating a regulatory "race to the bottom," as regulators compete to grow their banking and financial systems by lowering regulatory and supervisory standards below levels that are appropriate based on risk. But this desire for greater international consistency can be equally frustrated when U.S. regulators excessively calibrate requirements. As I previously noted, the U.S. proposal was calibrated at a level well in excess of other international jurisdictions as well as without sufficient analytical support and evidence that the proposed increases were proportionate to risk. This is not only a problem for international competitive equity, but also a concern for global financial stability. Significant banking activities occur in the international and cross-border context, and we know that financial stability risks can spread throughout global financial markets. The U.S. Basel proposal reflects elements of the agreed-upon standards, but it far exceeds them. Adjusting the calibration could have the important secondary benefit of enhancing this international consistency. The path forwardNotwithstanding what has brought us to this point, I do see a path forward to implement Basel III, one that addresses not only the overall calibration as well as international consistency and comparability, but also makes more granular changes that will improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the rule. In October 2023, the Federal Reserve launched a data collection to gather information from the banks affected by the U.S. proposal. I am hopeful that this data will allow regulators to better understand the impact of the proposal and to identify areas for revision. Any next step in this rulemaking process will require broad and material changes. It should also be accompanied by a data-driven analysis of the proposal and informed by the significant public input received during the rulemaking process. This should assist policymakers in creating a path to improve the rulemaking. My hope is that policymakers pay closer attention to the balance of costs and benefits and consider the direct and indirect consequences of the capital reform. I have previously identified a number of specific areas and procedural steps that would be necessary to address in any future efforts to revise this proposal. Some of these issues include While these steps would be a reasonable starting place, they are not a replacement for a data-driven analysis and a careful review of the comments submitted. This would result in a better proposal that includes changes to address not only these concerns, but also many other concerns raised by the public. Closing ThoughtsI would like to thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you today. My experience over the past five and a half years at the Federal Reserve highlights the enduring challenge of setting monetary policy amid a wide and evolving range of risks and uncertainties in the global economy. An important question I will be considering is how to make monetary policy durable to a wide range of possible shocks and changes in the macroeconomy, such as those experienced globally during the pandemic. We will continue to learn about the post-pandemic global economy, and, if history is any guide, new shocks to and changes in the economy will eventually and inevitably occur. While the economic outlook is uncertain, the FOMC's mandate of fostering price stability and maximum employment in the U.S. remains very clear. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. I also look forward to ongoing international discussions about bank capital and regulatory frameworks, and I hope that my brief remarks today relay both my support for ongoing international discussions on these matters and my firm belief that we must engage in regulatory reform efforts with our eyes wide open, acknowledging the benefits, costs, and tradeoffs. While our interconnected banking and financial system provides many benefits, we must also continue to focus on the opportunities it creates for financial stability risks to shift from domestic concerns to global vulnerabilities. Bank capital policy is an important measure to control these risks, but we know that capital is only one of many tools in our supervisory arsenal. And it is insufficient without the complement of other regulatory tools. So, as we continue the process of considering regulatory reform, I hope that we approach every issue with a broader lens, focusing on data-driven identification of the problems we are trying to solve, and with an openness to solving these problems in a more targeted and efficient way. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. For example, both the August and September 2021 employment reports suggested much lower job growth than did consensus forecasts, and these initial estimates were subsequently sizably increased. Similarly, total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation for nearly all quarters in 2021 has been revised higher than initially reported. See the real-time data on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's ALFRED website athttps://alfred.stlouisfed.org/series/downloaddata?seid=PAYEMS(job growth) andhttps://alfred.stlouisfed.org/series/downloaddata?seid=PCECTPI(PCE inflation).Return to text 3. See Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "Risks and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy: Current and Past Considerations," speech delivered at "Frameworks for Monetary Policy, Regulation, and Bank Capital" Spring 2024 Meeting of the Shadow Open Market Committee, hosted by the Manhattan Institute, New York, New York, April 5.Return to text 4. The new forward guidance in the September 2020 FOMC statement emphasized that the federal funds rate would remain near zero until "inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4) and "labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment" (paragraph 4). In the December 2020 FOMC statement, the FOMC added forward guidance regarding asset purchases that stated that the Federal Reserve would continue to purchase Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities at the then current pace of $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, "until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee's maximum employment and price stability goals" (paragraph 4). (The September and December 2020 FOMC statements are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.) The September and December 2020 forward guidance followed the August 2020 revisions to the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which are described on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/guide-to-changes-in-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm.Return to text 5. The Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) report for the fourth quarter of 2023 suggests that the slowdown in payroll employment gains was likely more pronounced than currently reported by the Current Employment Statistics (CES) establishment survey. The Q4 QCEW administrative data show employment gains that are about 110,000 per month lower than what the CES survey reported from March 2023 to December 2023. Although the BLS benchmarks CES payroll employment based on the Q1 QCEW, to be released on August 21, the Q4 QCEW data point to a substantial downward revision to CES employment gains last year.Return to text 6. See Francois de Soyres, Joaquin Garcia-Cabo Herrero, Nils Goernemann, Sharon Jeon, Grace Lofstrom, and Dylan Moore (2024), "Why Is the U.S. GDP Recovering Faster Than Other Advanced Economies?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 17).Return to text 7. See Governor Bowman's dissenting statement on the proposed rule to implement the Basel III endgame agreement for large banks; Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," press release, July 27.Return to text 8. See, for example, Financial Services Forum, American Bankers Association, Bank Policy Institute, and Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (2023), "Comments on Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity (PDF)," December 22, (noting that for the largest U.S. firms, the proposal would result in a greater than 30 percent increase in capital requirements, and a greater than 33 percent increase in risk-weighted assets).Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2013), "Regulatory Capital Rules: Regulatory Capital, Implementation of Basel III, Capital Adequacy, Transition Provisions, Prompt Corrective Action, Standardized Approach for Risk-weighted Assets, Market Discipline and Disclosure Requirements, Advanced Approaches Risk-Based Capital Rule, and Market Risk Capital Rule," final rule,Federal Register,vol. 78 (October 11), pp. 62018–291.Return to text 10. See Bowman, "Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," in note 7; Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision and Regulation (PDF)," speech delivered at the New York Bankers Association's Financial Services Forum, Palm Beach, Florida, November 9; Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform (PDF)," speech delivered at Protect Main Street, sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C., January 17.Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Thank you for your introduction, Adam, and thank you for the invitation to speak here today. It is great to come to Peterson to discuss the economic outlook and monetary policy, which is my topic this afternoon.1 As I stand here today, inflation remains too high, but I am encouraged by the overall progress and trajectory. Recent data on the economy and inflation also give me cautious optimism that we are on track and making continued headway toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) inflation goal of 2 percent. That progress may have paused in the first three months of the year, but information since then on economic activity, the labor market, and inflation points to renewed progress. Over the last year through April, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was 2.7 percent, down from 7.1 percent at its peak in 2022. Core PCE inflation—which excludes the volatile food and energy categories—was 2.8 percent through April, down from its peak of 5.6 percent. Based on consumer and producer price inflation for May released last week, I estimate that 12-month PCE inflation in May was a bit lower than in April. I was encouraged by some of the details of the recent reports, particularly the continued improvement in market-based services inflation, which is based on observation of actual market prices rather than imputed values. That's important because market-based prices are likely to be a better indication of the overall trend for core services inflation than nonmarket prices. Housing services inflation, meanwhile, continues to be persistent. Market rents for new tenant leases have already cooled significantly, but further progress in overall housing services inflation will rely on the ongoing pass-through of the previous market rents deceleration to the rents of existing tenants with expiring leases. So inflation is still too high, and further progress is likely to be gradual. However, there are several reasons why I remain optimistic that improving supply and cooling demand will support continued disinflation. The first reason I am optimistic about further progress on inflation has to do with declining price increases and even declining prices as consumers become more price sensitive. I think of this from several, related angles—I will mention a few. As I have discussed in previous speeches, reduced frequency of price adjustments helps moderate prices. And the frequency with which firms adjust prices, which accelerated to less than every five months in early 2022, moved closer to every seven months as of the end of 2023.2Price adjustment frequency picked up some early this year, along with the temporary firming of inflation, but the general trend has been consistent with ongoing disinflation. An additional basis for price-setting optimism is the fact that longer-run inflation expectations have remained well anchored. Research by the Richmond Fed has found that price-setting decisions by firms are related to their own expectations about the path of overall inflation, so anchored inflation expectations among firms are likely to result in price setting consistent with those lower price expectations.3 In addition, there may still be room for markups of prices over labor costs to continue falling. While markups are famously difficult to measure, rough, simple estimates of markups of prices over labor costs have fallen back from high levels but still remain above their pre-pandemic trend, especially in the goods sector.4A return of markups to this trend could help ongoing progress toward 2 percent inflation. A final factor for optimism about positive price-setting developments is the range of anecdotes from firms themselves. The most recent edition of the Fed's Beige Book suggests firms are increasingly attentive to consumers pushing back against additional price increases and that these businesses expect to increase prices only moderately in the near term. Beyond the Beige Book, I have gleaned from recent earnings reports by publicly traded companies that lower-income consumers are pulling back from their purchasing and that firms are responding by moderating price increases or, in some cases, actually cutting prices. What I have heard in my own conversations with business contacts is that consumers are "trading down" to lower-cost products and that firms are responding with more discounting. And some large retailers have publicly spoken about cutting prices in the face of resistant consumers. These various indicators—markups, price adjustment frequency, inflation expectations, and anecdotes from a range of sources—suggest that, on balance, price-setting behavior is likely to continue to move closer to consistency with the FOMC's inflation target. A second reason for my optimism about continued disinflation is slower growth in the costs faced by businesses. Among those, nominal wages are a big part of total costs in the services sector. Nominal wage growth has continued to trend down, consistent with a labor market where supply and demand are coming into better balance. Of course, as a general matter, I want to see Americans experiencing strong wage growth, but for that wage growth to be sustainable, it must be consistent with our inflation target. Notably, as inflation has come down, real wages have been rising and now exceed pre-pandemic levels, which means that the purchasing power of workers has also been increasing. But at the same time, we have seen slowing growth in nominal labor costs. For example, the 12-month increase in average hourly earnings has been running just above 4 percent over the past couple of months after peaking at around 6 percent in 2022 and falling more or less steadily since then. The latest readings compare with an average of around 3 percent a year before the pandemic, when inflation was running below our 2 percent goal. Wage moderation is especially evident in some service sectors for which labor is a large share of costs. If this moderation in wage growth continues, it will soon be at levels consistent with price stability. And I note that the market-based services inflation measure I mentioned earlier tends to move closely with wage growth. Other developments in labor markets also point toward continued resilience, but there are signs of gradual cooling and continued wage moderation. Gains in payrolls averaged 218,000 over the past two months, which is a solid pace. But most other indicators point to a slow but steady easing of the labor market, supported by cooling demand for hiring as well as strong supply. In terms of demand, both the job openings rate and the hiring rate have come down from their highs of late 2021 and early 2022. The job opening rate is not far above its pre-pandemic range, and the hiring rate is below pre-pandemic. Surveys of business hiring intentions likewise suggest cooler demand for workers. On the supply side, we have seen notable growth in labor supply over the past year. Labor force participation among prime-age women, in particular, reached another all-time record in May. And the strong inflows of immigrants I have discussed in previous speeches have continued this year, which points to continued labor supply growth as recent immigrants gradually make their way into the labor market. With cooling demand and solid supply, measures of labor market tightness have continued to ease. The unemployment rate has been gradually rising and reached 4 percent in May, still very low in historical terms and the 30th straight month at 4 percent or lower. Another indicator of labor market tightness, the ratio of job vacancies to the number of people counted as looking for work, crossed an important threshold in April. After rising as high as 2 vacancies for each person seeking a job during the pandemic, that ratio fell to 1.2, which was the level before the pandemic. Another indicator of labor market tightness, the rate of people voluntarily quitting their jobs, is actually below the pre-pandemic level. The average duration for job vacancies is down, and it is becoming easier for employers to fill jobs. We policymakers like to make our judgments based on a preponderance of the data, and a preponderance of the labor market data indicates that labor market supply and demand are coming into better balance. A third reason for my optimism about achieving 2 percent inflation is that I am also cautiously optimistic about productivity growth, which is a source of supply expansion that is likely to put downward pressure on inflation without slower economic growth. One factor is the remarkable rise in the rate of new business creation, which started early in the pandemic and has continued, more or less, even through last month.5Economic research finds that while many new and young firms struggle to survive, a small subset of new firms are highly productive and grow rapidly, eventually making significant contributions to aggregate productivity.6And the pandemic-era business creation surge has been particularly strong in high-tech sectors, such as computer systems design and research and development services.7Some recent history favors a payoff to productivity growth from this surge in entrepreneurship. Before the jump in productivity growth in the late 1990s through the early 2000s, there was a similar wave of strong business entries in high-tech industries.8I suspect that most of the productivity benefits of the recent entry surge are still ahead of us. Another basis for productivity optimism is the prospect for widespread implementation of artificial intelligence (AI) in its various forms. To be sure, there is tremendous uncertainty around the future path of AI and its effects on the economy, and we must all think carefully about how it may affect workers and the kinds of tasks they perform. But AI technology has the potential to make workers and firms more productive—effectively boosting aggregate supply. Of course, many technologies can take a long time to show through to aggregate productivity. The spread of electrification more than a century ago required complementary assets like power lines and appliances to be created and installed. But I suspect that AI may diffuse more quickly, in part because many of the complementary assets needed for the initial spread of AI—such as computers, networks, and the like—are already in place, even while there is still an enormous amount of additional hardware buildout still ahead of us. And survey data from the Census Bureau suggest that firms in many sectors are already employing AI.9Only time will tell, of course, but the prospect of higher productivity growth raises the possibility that inflation can fall without a significant slowdown in economic activity and employment. My fourth and final reason for optimism on inflation is that I believe the current stance of monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive to help cool the economy and bring inflation back toward 2 percent without a sharp contraction in economic activity or a significant deterioration of the labor market. Interest rates remain elevated relative to a year ago, and certainly relative to two or three years ago, and are restricting economic activity. Of course, some aspects of financial conditions, such as house prices and, especially, stock prices, remain robust; and credit is still generally available, though high interest rates make borrowing expensive. These factors likely have some distributional implications: Higher-income people with large stock portfolios may not feel that conditions are so restrictive, while lower earners who need to borrow to buy a house or a car do not need to be told that finances are tight. But the overall restrictiveness of financial conditions is apparent in interest rate–sensitive sectors. For example, the level of residential investment in the first quarter—though showing some modest improvement relative to last year's pace—was still roughly 15 percent below its peak in 2021. Business investment in equipment contracted a bit in 2023 and showed only tepid growth in the first quarter of this year. And while consumption growth has been resilient over the past couple of years, fueled in part by excess savings accumulated during the pandemic and solid real wages that now exceed pre-pandemic levels, it slowed noticeably in the first quarter, especially for spending on goods. Indeed, high interest rates have left a mark on consumer assessments of buying conditions for motor vehicles and other large durable goods, which often have to be financed.10 The effects of restrictive financial conditions are also evident in labor markets. As I discussed earlier, the labor market has cooled gradually, and, looking ahead, I expect some cooling of economic activity to continue. But I am watching closely for any signs of labor market deterioration that may take hold, as the FOMC also pays attention to the other side of our mandate. Notwithstanding my optimism about the economic outlook, I am mindful of a number of risks to both sides of the dual mandate. On the inflation side, the resurgence of import prices at the beginning of the year is concerning, even if import prices came down some last month, and could anticipate greater pressure on goods prices in the coming months. Goods prices have been a key source of disinflation over the past year or so, as supply chains have healed. While supply chains appear to have been fairly resilient to a series of shocks since the end of last year—including attacks on shipping in the Red Sea and low water levels in the Panama Canal—geopolitical developments in Ukraine and the Middle East still could lead to a sharp rise in global energy and food prices and disrupt global supply chains. Another risk I am focused on is that a further cooling of the U.S. economy could lead to a sharp deterioration in labor market conditions. Output growth appears to have slowed in the first half of this year, and while consumer spending still grew in the first quarter, the May retail sales report we received this morning may be another signal that the long-expected deceleration in consumer spending may finally be upon us. After a considerable decline in job vacancies, firms facing decreasing demand might increasingly resort to laying off workers. Lastly, I also see risks to the global economy that could spill back to the U.S. economy. While growth in some countries—notably in Europe—appears to be picking up from a soft patch last year, that pickup remains tentative. And the latest data from China suggest that economic momentum there has slowed considerably amid a continuing real estate crisis. Let me now turn to the implications of my economic outlook for monetary policy. While I remain cautiously optimistic that inflation is coming down, it is still too high, and it is moving down only slowly. I believe that policy has more work to do, which is why I supported the FOMC's decision last week to keep the federal funds rate in a range of 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent. We need to see more progress toward 2 percent inflation before I will have confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward that objective. For the reasons I have outlined today, I believe economic conditions are moving in the right direction. If the economy evolves as I am expecting, it will likely become appropriate to begin easing policy sometime later this year. But, as always, my judgment will be guided by the data. Let me conclude by acknowledging that the surge in inflation over the past few years means that prices are now significantly higher than they were just a few years ago, even as the rate of price increases has slowed dramatically since mid-2022. While I am heartened by data showing that nominal wages are now growing at a faster rate than prices, I know many Americans are still struggling with high costs. I also know that many Americans are facing high borrowing costs. That's why I will be watching the data carefully in the months ahead to ensure that we are on track to achieve both sides of our dual mandate. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. These facts are from Hugh Montag and Daniel Villar (2023), "Price-Setting during the Covid Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 29). I thank the authors for providing me with updated data through early 2024.Return to text 3. For research on firms' price-setting and inflation expectations, see Felipe F. Schwartzman and Sonya Ravindranath Waddell (2024), "Inflation Expectations and Price Setting among Fifth District Firms," Economic Brief 24-03 (Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, January). With regard to overall measures of inflation expectations, anchored longer-run inflation expectations are apparent in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, where 5-to-10-year-ahead expectations remain close to values seen a decade ago; in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, where 10-year inflation expectations are close to pre-pandemic norms; and in other sources.Return to text 4. For example, the ratio of the producer price index (PPI) for final demand goods to the employment cost index for private goods industries rose roughly 20 percent from the end of 2020 to the middle of 2022. In services, this ratio rose roughly 5 percent. The ratios for both sectors have come down from their peak levels but were still above their end-2020 levels as of the first quarter of this year—and they had been on downward trends before the pandemic. Similar analysis using PCE prices instead of PPI yields a qualitatively similar result for goods industries, though, in services, the PCE price-to-wage ratio has been roughly flat.Return to text 5. See Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger (2023), "Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: Causes and Consequences? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,BPEA Conference Draft, September 28–29, pp. 1–87. Data from the Census Bureau's Business Formation Statistics suggest business creation has remained above pre-pandemic norms through May 2024.Return to text 6. See Titan Alon, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley (2018), "Older and Slower: The Startup Deficit's Lasting Effects on Aggregate Productivity Growth,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 93 (January), pp. 1102–47; and Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24.Return to text 7. See Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), "High Tech Business Entry in the Pandemic Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 19).Return to text 8. See Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, John C. Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf (2021), "Innovation, Productivity Dispersion, and Productivity Growth" in Carol Corrado, Jonathan Haskel, Javier Miranda, and Daniel Sichel, eds.,Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the Twenty-First Century,vol. 78:Studies in Income and Wealth(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 103–136.Return to text 9. Data are from the Census Bureau's Business Trends and Outlook Survey. In data released May 23, 2024, the share of firms reporting current AI usage was 18 percent in the information sector and 12 percent in the professional services sector. Several other sectors had shares at 5 percent or above.Return to text 10. In the Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the net shares of respondents reporting that now is a bad time to buy, versus a good time to buy, motor vehicles or large household durables, specifically because of high interest rates, remain well above pre-pandemic levels, though there has been some gradual improvement since mid-2022.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the ISDA Board of Directors, London, England I would like to thank the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) for the invitation to speak to you today.1I appreciate the opportunity to engage with you on matters that affect the swaps and derivatives industry, specifically how we can best consider and address the potential consequences of bank capital reform measures, both in the United States and around the world. Before doing so, I will share my views on the economy and monetary policy in the United States. Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy OutlookOver the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our meeting earlier this month, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. After seeing considerable progress on slowing inflation last year, we have seen only modest further progress this year. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation have moved roughly sideways or slightly down since December and remained elevated at 2.7 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, in April. The consumer price index (CPI) report for May showed 12-month core CPI inflation slowing to 3.4 percent from 3.6 percent in April. However, with average core CPI inflation this year through May running at an annualized rate of 3.8 percent, notably above average inflation in the second half of last year, I expect inflation to remain elevated for some time. The recent pickup in inflation in the first several months of 2024 was evident across many goods and services categories, suggesting that inflation was temporarily lower in the latter half of last year. Prices continue to be much higher than before the pandemic, which is weighing on consumer sentiment. Inflation has hit lower-income households hardest since food, energy, and housing services price increases far outpaced overall inflation throughout this episode. Economic activity increased at a strong pace last year but appears to have moderated early this year. First-quarter gross domestic product growth was slower than in the second half of last year, though private domestic final purchases continued to rise at a solid pace. Continued softness in consumer spending and weaker housing activity early in the second quarter also suggest less momentum in economic activity so far this year. Payroll employment continued to rise at a solid pace in April and May, though slightly slower than in the first quarter, partly reflecting increased immigrant labor supply. Despite some further rebalancing between supply and demand, the labor market remains tight. The unemployment rate edged up to 4.0 percent in May, while the number of job openings relative to unemployed workers declined further to near its pre-pandemic level. Labor force participation dropped back to 62.5 percent in May, which suggests no further improvement in labor supply along this margin, as labor force participation among those aged 55 and older has been persistently low. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance appears to be restrictive, and I will continue to monitor the incoming data to assess whether monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our target. As I've noted recently, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady. And should the incoming data indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower the target range for the federal funds rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. However, we are still not yet at the point where it is appropriate to lower the policy rate, and I continue to see a number of upside risks to inflation. First, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements, including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due in part to immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unlikely that further improvements along this margin will continue to lower inflation going forward as supply chains have largely normalized; the labor force participation rate has leveled off in recent months below pre-pandemic levels; and an open U.S. immigration policy over the past few years, which added millions of new immigrants in the U.S., may become more restrictive. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, including the risk that spillovers from regional conflicts could disrupt global supply chains, putting additional upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices. There is also the risk that the loosening in financial conditions since late last year, reflecting considerable gains in equity valuations, and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that increased immigration and continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. With labor markets remaining tight, wage growth has been elevated at around or above 4 percent, still higher than the pace consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal, given trend productivity growth. In light of these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the current state of the economy and predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. In my view, we should consider a range of possible scenarios that could unfold when considering how the FOMC's monetary policy decisions may evolve. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a restrictive level, I remain willing to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Grappling with the Unintended Consequences of Bank Capital ReformI will turn now to the issue of bank capital reform, and the implications of adopting and implementing the Basel III "endgame" standards both in the United States and around the world. Considering capital and debt requirements in the aggregateCapital requirements are an important component of the prudential regulatory frameworks and interconnected banking and financial systems around the world. As you know, the U.S. has lagged our E.U. and U.K. counterparts in fully implementing the Basel III capital standards. In July 2023, the U.S. federal banking agencies issued a public consultation on implementing what the U.S. calls the Basel III "endgame" capital reforms.2The response to the U.S. capital proposal has been overwhelmingly negative, including from a broad range of stakeholders. I have previously spoken at length about my concerns with the proposal, and as public commenters have reviewed it, they have identified additional areas of concern.3 In my view, the concerns are well-founded. The proposal acknowledged that the revisions, if implemented, would result in an estimated 20 percent aggregate increase in total risk-weighted assets across bank holding companies subject to the rule. Individual impacts would vary not only by firm, but also by business line. For any particular business line or product, the aggregate impact of the proposed capital changes could result in a more significant increase, depending upon the firm's characteristics. Consider the impact on business lines subject to the market risk capital rule. As noted in the proposal, the revisions to the market risk rule alone would increase risk-weighted assets from $430 billion to $760 billion for Category I and II firms, and from $130 billion to $220 billion for Category III and IV firms.4 Even this example ignores the additive capital increases from other aspects of the rule, such as the operational risk charge "overlay" that may separately result in a higher capital charge for the same business line, if that line is also generating fee income. The changes that may affect any particular financial product or service vary but could include impacts across all aspects of the proposal. For many of the derivatives and swaps activities in which banking entities engage, the aggregate impacts on different business lines could result from changes to the market risk rule, the calculation of credit valuation adjustments, and the treatment of securities financing transactions, among others. So far, what I have described are just the aggregate effects of capital increases that would appear within the four corners of the U.S. Basel III endgame proposal. We know that these changes do not exist in a vacuum. A particular firm can also be impacted by changes to the global systemically important bank (G-SIB) surcharge and long-term debt requirements. The firm's business planning would also need to consider existing requirements, such as leverage and "total loss-absorbing capacity" requirements. By design, these elements are intended to be complementary, often seeking to capture different risks, operate as "backstop" capital standards, promote resiliency, and be available for recapitalization in resolution. Despite the goal that the capital framework operates in a holistic fashion, the rulemaking process in the United States has taken a fragmented approach. This process has seemed to ignore the interrelationships of the requirements. We cannot fully understand the intended and unintended consequences of any regulatory reform, including capital reform, without using a broader lens to consider the interconnections and interrelationships among different capital and debt requirements that apply in the banking system. This narrow approach to rulemaking—focusing on a specific reform, without considering the broader framework—has created a corresponding narrowness when we think about the consequences of regulatory reform. This challenge has been particularly acute in the capital and debt space simply because there are so many requirements that are intended to operate in a complementary way, and that in the aggregate may overlap or conflict, generating unintended consequences. The Federal Reserve has expressly acknowledged the complementary nature of these requirements, for example in noting that some leverage ratio requirements operate as a backstop to risk-based capital requirements.5And yet, the discussions of costs and benefits of reform tend to disregard the aggregate impact across rules, even when related reforms are proposed at the same time and the aggregate impacts can be identified and assessed.6 Considering direct and indirect consequencesWith respect to the Basel III "endgame" reforms, much of the discussion of consequences has focused on the direct consequences to the availability and price of credit, resulting from the proposed changes to risk-weighted assets. These issues resonate with households and businesses. Everyone understands the direct impact on their own household finances or their business's bottom line from higher costs of lending. Often overlooked are the direct and indirect consequences of capital reforms on financial products such as derivatives and swaps. These products can seem exotic to the public, but we know they play a significant role in the financial system and the broader economy, including commodities price hedging by end-users, such as agricultural producers. And it is certainly foreseeable that proposed capital reforms could impair market liquidity. We also know that regulatory reforms—especially capital reforms with a direct link to particular products, services, and markets—can cause broader changes in firm behavior. Some banks may raise prices on particular products based on their internal allocation of increased capital charges. And some banks may discontinue certain products or services that cannot be offered in a cost-effective way. These choices will impact the competitive landscape into the future, and in some cases—such as where significant economies of scale are required to offer a product or service—the end result may be that some banks exit certain product markets, resulting in increased concentration and higher prices for households and businesses. While I am acutely aware of our need to consider these costs and price effects, I am also aware that regulators sitting in Washington, D.C. are not well-equipped to query and understand these real-world consequences of reform. In my view, the commenter feedback we have received on these issues has helped to illuminate these consequences. My hope is that we take them into account when moving forward to implement the Basel III endgame standards. The path forwardI do see a path forward to implement Basel III, one that not only addresses the overall calibration and international consistency and comparability, but also makes more granular changes that will improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the rule. In terms of this path, I will briefly outline what I see as necessary procedural steps, while also providing a non-exclusive list of substantive changes that I believe are necessary to improve the proposal. In October 2023, the Federal Reserve initiated a data collection to gather information from the banks affected by the U.S. proposal. I am hopeful that these data will allow regulators to better understand the proposal's impact and identify areas for revision. Any next step in this rulemaking process will require broad and material changes. It should also be accompanied by a data-driven analysis of the proposal and be informed by the significant public input received during the rulemaking process. This should assist policymakers in creating a path to improve the rulemaking. My hope is that policymakers pay closer attention to the balance of costs and benefits while considering the direct and indirect consequences of the capital reform. I have previously identified a number of specific areas and procedural steps that would be necessary to address in any future efforts to revise this proposal. Some of these issues include While these steps would be a reasonable starting place, they are not a replacement for a data-driven analysis and a careful review of the comments submitted. This would result in a better proposal that includes not only changes to address these concerns, but also the many other concerns raised by the public. Closing ThoughtsIt has been a pleasure speaking with you today. Your industry plays an important role not only in the U.S. economy, but also in the broader world economy. It is imperative that regulators not lose sight of the practical implications of regulatory reform, even as the U.S. considers the next steps in moving forward to adopt the final Basel III capital reforms. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), "Agencies Request Comment on Proposed Rules to Strengthen Capital Requirements for Large Banks," news release, July 27, 2023; OCC, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and FDIC, "Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity (PDF)," 88 Fed. Reg. 64,028–64,343 (September 18, 2023).Return to text 3. See dissenting statement, "Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman" on the proposed rule to implement the Basel III endgame agreement for large banks, news release, July 27, 2023;Michelle W. Bowman, "Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision and Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the New York Bankers Association's Financial Services Forum, Palm Beach, Florida, November 9, 2023); Michelle W. Bowman, "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform (PDF)" (speech at Protect Main Street, sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C., January 17, 2024).Return to text 4. OCC, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and FDIC, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, "Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Signfiicant Trading Activity," 88 Fed. Reg. 64,028, 64,168, table 11 (September 18, 2023).Return to text 5. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Interim Final Rule and Request for Comment, "Temporary Exclusion of U.S. Treasury Securities and Deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio (PDF)," 85 Fed. Reg. 20,578, 20,579 (April 14, 2020) ("This interim final rule does not affect the tier 1 leverage ratio, which will continue to serve as a backstop for all banking organizations subject to the capital rule.").Return to text 6. See, e.g., OCC, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and FDIC, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, "Long-Term Debt Requirements for Large Bank Holding Companies, Certain Intermediate Holding Companies of Foreign Banking Organizations, and Large Insured Depository Institutions (PDF)," 88 Fed. Reg. 64,524, 64,551, n. 97 ("The agencies recognize that their Basel III reforms proposal would, if adopted, increase risk-weighted assets across covered entities. The increased risk-weighted assets would lead mechanically to increased requirements for LTD under the LTD proposal. The increased capital that would be required under the Basel III proposal could also reduce the cost of various forms of debt for impacted firms due to the increased resilience that accompanies additional capital (which is sometimes referred to as the Modigliani–Miller offset).The size of the estimated LTD needs and costs presented in this section do not account for either of these potential effects of the Basel III proposal.") (emphasis added). Even when the agencies estimate the effect of a proposal on other rules, the impact analysis tends to be narrow, such as focusing on the estimated shortfall that would be created by the interrelated rules and may overlook other pending rules. See, e.g., OCC, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and FDIC, "Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity (PDF)," 88 Fed. Reg. at 64,171 (noting that the proposed revisions to the calculation of risk-weighted assets under the Basel III endgame proposal would affect the risk-based TLAC and LTD requirements applicable to Category I bank holding companies but disregarding the pending proposal that would expand long-term debt requirements to a broader set of firms).Return to text 7. See dissenting statement, "Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman" on the proposed rule to implement the Basel III endgame agreement for large banks, news release, July 27, 2023; Michelle W. Bowman, "Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision and Regulation (PDF)"; Michelle W. Bowman, "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform (PDF)."Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the 2024 International Journal of Central Banking Conference, Rome, Italy Thank you, Stefano, and thank you to the Central Bank of Italy (CBI) for hosting this year's conference. When it is in the news, central banking often looks like the work of individual policymakers handing down their decisions. In fact, it is a team effort of many people working together, and that is also the case for editing theInternational Journal of Central Banking(IJCB) and planning this conference. I have a long list of people to thank who did the lion's share of that work during the year that I have served as managing editor. But for those who may not know it, let me first review the history of the journal and then discuss what this conference will address. In the summer of 2004, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the European Central Bank, and the Group of Ten central banks agreed to support the development of a new publication focused on the theory and practice of central banking. We didn't launch this journal because there was a shortage of research on central banking or of journals eager to publish it. Far from it. Central bankers themselves continue to publish peer-reviewed research in leading journals, not to mention many working papers published by central banks and other outlets. This work was prevalent, but there was a sense that there lacked a place for scholarly research that focused exclusively on central banking and could serve as a forum for the community of central bankers around the world. The creation of the International Journal of Central Banking filled this deficit. The primary objectives of the IJCB are to widely disseminate the best policy-relevant and applied research on central banking and to promote communication among researchers inside and outside central banks. We do this with publication of the journal, which will now be coming out six times a year, and with the added attention of this conference, which presents research on timely policy topics. The journal has attracted distinguished managing editors, including my colleagues from the Federal Reserve and my immediate predecessor, Luc Laeven from the European Central Bank. We have the strong support now of nearly 55 sponsoring institutions, including the Central Bank of Italy and also the host of last year's conference, the Central Bank of Ireland. In 2023, we chose the theme for this year's conference based on events very much on the minds of central bankers: "The Transmission of Monetary Policy in the Post-Pandemic World." Many things changed both during COVID and after. First, there was an unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy response to the pandemic. Second, structural changes have occurred, including supply chain issues and shifts in the organization of work. Finally, economies have been grappling with elevated inflation. This economic environment has raised several policy questions that the papers presented here attempt to answer. These are questions that policymakers, including those here today, must grapple with, even when the answers are far from apparent. Academic research provides insights into these questions and possible answers, ways to analyze the data, and the foundations for testing theories with economic models. The papers presented here today and tomorrow are ideal examples of the kind of work that can help policymakers do their jobs better, and can facilitate the sharing of knowledge around the world. We have sessions on how firms' balance sheets, households' savings and borrowing decisions, as well as supply chains, influence monetary policy transmission. We also will look into financial market impacts and labor market considerations of the current policy environment. Before we get to those presentations, and what I hope will be vigorous discussions, let me recognize several people who made this event possible. Here at the CBI, Stefano and Enrico Sette helped organize this conference. Enrico is a co-editor of the IJCB. Let me mention the other co-editors: Ana Babus, Diana Bonfim, Huberto Ennis, Carlos Garriga, Refet Gürkaynak, Òscar Jordà, Robin Lumsdaine, Fernanda Nechio, and Steven Ongena. This conference and the day-to-day smooth running of the journal couldn't be accomplished without the editorial team at the BIS and the Board of Governors. A special thank you goes to Kommaly Dias and Jessica Flagg from my staff. And, finally, a big thank you to my adviser Jane Ihrig, who does so much for me and who worked to oversee the process at the IJCB this past year. And with that, I will step away from the microphone and put the spotlight where it should be, on the scholars presenting their work today. Thank you.