No content found
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 19th BCBS-FSI High-Level Meeting for Africa, Cape Town, South Africa IntroductionThank you to the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for International Settlements and especially to its Chair, Fernando Restoy for the invitation to speak about these important topics.1I'd also like to thank the South African Reserve Bank for hosting this gathering. It is a pleasure to join you in Cape Town, and I am delighted to speak with you about advancing cross-border payments and financial inclusion. I find great value in engaging with and learning from our international colleagues on these international and domestic issues. We are all participants in a global and interconnected financial ecosystem, and payments are a vital component of this system. The payments landscape continues to evolve, through infrastructure upgrades, innovation, changing consumer preferences, and advancements in both the public and private sectors. Faster, cheaper, more transparent, and more inclusive cross-border payment services offer widespread benefits for citizens and economies around the world, with the potential to support economic growth, international trade, global development, and financial inclusion. This global ecosystem is comprised of individual jurisdictions, each with its own history, public policy objectives, payment infrastructures, and regulatory environments. Within these independent economies exist a wide range of businesses and consumers, all with vastly different needs and requirements. As policymakers, we must consider not only how to foster safe, efficient, and accessible payment and settlement infrastructures to support the broader financial system but also how those same systems and infrastructures can support the needs of consumers, businesses, and financial service providers. This includes support for responsible innovation and enabling providers, such as banks and other nonbank financial service providers, to meet the evolving needs of their customers. In many cases, the policy tradeoffs we face domestically are amplified in the cross-border context. To foster safety and efficiency in the payment system, it is imperative to seek improvements that support an accessible and inclusive system that works for the broad spectrum of different participants, while still maintaining rigorous risk, fraud prevention, and compliance standards that are critical for protecting participants and the overall system. It is also important to note that these issues are complex and will not be resolved through advances in technology alone. Rather, changes in technology must align with the evolution in individual behavior and market conventions, and when this does occur, it does so only over time. Today, I will share my views on the evolving cross-border payments landscape, discuss how financial inclusion is framed within this broader context, highlight the roles that both the public and private sectors play, and identify actions that the Federal Reserve is taking to improve payment system infrastructures and support responsible innovation. Throughout, I will highlight the key challenges and public policy tradeoffs that we, as policymakers, should consider. Complexity and Challenges of the Cross-Border Payments LandscapeCross-border payments face a number of challenges, including high costs, low speed, barriers to access, and limited transparency.2Today, cross-border payments are carried out through a diverse, multilayered set of networks and are inherently more complex than domestic payments as they involve multiple participants, infrastructures, currencies, time zones, jurisdictions, and legal and regulatory frameworks. These challenges add complexity and create frictions in the cross-border payments process, leading to higher transaction costs and slower processing times for consumers and businesses. To help address these frictions, the G20 countries agreed in 2020 to a multiyear roadmap to identify and develop improvements to cross-border payments.3The G20Roadmap for Enhancing Cross-Border Paymentsis an instructive example of collaboration across jurisdictions, engaging in international dialogs and working with the private sector to identify how best to ease unnecessary frictions. As one who values efficiency, I am generally supportive of opportunities to address unnecessary frictions. However, when considering frictions related to cross-border payments, some are necessary while others may not be necessary. Any discussion of these frictions must be nuanced and properly contextualized since there are public policy tradeoffs and operational realities that must be considered. Some frictions may be the result of intentional policy choices and safeguards implemented to protect the parties involved in a transaction while also protecting the financial system as a whole. Other frictions may result from consumer or business preferences. As policymakers, we must consider all of these frictions within this broader context. Let's take compliance requirements as an example. Banks play a critical role in implementing compliance and reporting requirements that support public policy objectives, including the deterrence of financial crimes and countering terrorism finance. In the United States and other jurisdictions, banks balance this need for transparency to deter crime with the need to protect the privacy of consumer financial data.4While regulatory compliance requirements add complexity, particularly in cross-border payments, it is a complexity that results from the discretion to apply various compliance frameworks in different jurisdictions. With this in mind, we can consider ways to encourage more consistent implementation of rigorous international standards and continue to support the development of new technologies and solutions that help automate processes, reduce costs, and promote effective safeguards across jurisdictions. As I have discussed in previous remarks, while conversations on payments innovation often focus on technological capabilities as the solution to realizing certain benefits, technology on its own is not always the driver of realizing these benefits since many of these issues are grounded in policy choices and operational realities.5However, it is still important to assess potential opportunities for technological innovation and the benefits technology could provide within the broader context of a robust, well-functioning global banking and payments system. I have long supported responsible innovation that solves specific problems and enables financial service providers to meet the needs of consumers and businesses in a safe and sound manner. Despite the difficulty and complexity of overcoming cross-border frictions and challenges, we can work together, through the G20 and in other collaborative settings, to identify ways to make incremental and tangible progress. There are many tools to consider—such as infrastructure improvements, sharing best practices across jurisdictions, improving data flows, and recognizing innovative technologies and business models. This work will likely require a combination of these tools to reduce unnecessary frictions while still achieving significant policy goals. Payments and Financial InclusionI will turn now to discuss financial inclusion, which is an important lens through which policymakers should consider these challenges.6Many features of the payment system—such as access, cost, and speed—have profound implications for financial inclusion. In my view, the payment system and the broader economy are most efficient and effective when there is broad participation, when unnecessary frictions are minimized, and when banks, especially smaller financial institutions, can provide services to meet consumer demand in a safe and sound manner. An inclusive financial system offers accessible choices that meet consumers' needs and enhance their financial well-being. From a consumer's perspective, this means the opportunity to make payments, to build wealth and gain access to credit and other needed financial services to participate in an increasingly digital and interconnected economy. Access to the payments system enables consumers to meet financial obligations by receiving and transferring money safely and in a timely manner. Reliable, cost-efficient payment services promote financial inclusion by providing consumers with options that meet their various needs. This is critical because financial inclusion is not a one-size-fits-all solution. In the U.S., for example, consumers come from a wide range of economic circumstances; have varied perceptions of and experiences with the banking system; and, most importantly, have different needs when it comes to financial products and services. It is also essential to note that gaps in financial inclusion differ across jurisdictions. In some cases, these gaps stem from the limited availability of and individual ability to access the various types of payment and financial services provided in different countries. This varied access to services may be due in part to unique regulatory environments and consumer and business preferences. Thus, policymakers and service providers within each jurisdiction are best suited to tailor solutions within their own domestic context. Although each jurisdiction is unique, we as policymakers should be willing to collaborate and assess opportunities for systemic improvements that could provide widespread benefits, including the work of the G20 in support of cross-border payments. Minimizing unnecessary frictions is a worthy goal whether the intended beneficiary is an international financial institution, a small business or nonprofit managing cashflow with international customers, or a consumer simply seeking to send and receive payments, needing to do so safely without excessive fees or experiencing extended delays in receiving funds. In the context of cross-border payments, global remittances can also play a significant role in expanding financial inclusion. In some countries, these remittances are an economic driver by serving as a key source of funding for some households, which can provide a path to a more inclusive economy. As a result, it is critical that consumers can send and receive these types of payments safely, efficiently, and affordably. Research has shown that the ability to receive remittances increases the probability of having a bank account and contributes to economic engagement.7Yet, high fee structures for remittance services can have a significant impact on households sending money abroad. Recent data show the average cost for sending a $200 remittance from the United States was approximately 5.8 percent of the transaction amount, or about $12.8The G20 countries have reaffirmed the United Nations Sustainable Development target for reducing average remittance fees to below 3 percent by 2030.9Encouraging more cost-effective remittance services could result in a greater proportion of funds reaching the intended recipients, which could further bolster their economic capabilities. Roles To Be Played by both Private and Public Sectors But how might we achieve some of these more efficient and cost-effective payment systems? Both public- and private-sector participants have critical and complementary roles in advancing financial inclusion within a given jurisdiction and improving the efficiencies of cross-border payments and remittances. The payments industry has long relied upon innovation to meet the evolving needs and expectations of consumers and businesses. In an increasingly digital economy, these innovations offer valuable options for consumers and business to send and receive payments in more convenient and cost-effective ways. Today, the private sector offers opportunities to expand access to digital payments and other financial services. For example, in the U.S., the Bank On program promotes a national standard for customer bank accounts that are both low cost and low risk.10Other jurisdictions have incorporated improvements in financial access through mobile money transaction accounts. Some payment service providers have established partnerships to expand upon the options available to consumers and businesses for sending and receiving funds. Other private sector initiatives are exploring technology enhancements to offer more convenient digital options for consumers and businesses to send remittances or make payments across borders. These private sector developments complement ongoing public sector cross-border initiatives, including the G20 work. Continued collaboration like these efforts across the public and private sectors must support responsible innovation, including a well-defined regulatory perimeter that protects consumers and the broader financial system. I'd like to take a moment to highlight two instances in which the Federal Reserve has provided clarity to support financial inclusion within a framework of responsible innovation. First, the Fed issued an interagency statement in support of banks engaging in small-dollar lending.11This guidance underscores the importance of financial institutions offering small-dollar loan products to consumers and small businesses that support successful repayment outcomes and that avoid continuous cycles of debt due to rollover and reborrowing. Additionally, the statement recognizes that these products can help borrowers transition into other types of credit-based financial products. Second, the Fed also issued an interagency statement on the use of alternative data in credit underwriting.12This guidance clarifies that with a customer's consent, a bank can use alternative data, like checking account balance activity, to help evaluate the creditworthiness of a potential borrower who might not otherwise qualify for a loan. In both cases, timely guidance has sought to support responsible innovation and leverage the cashflow information on deposit accounts to meet their customers' needs. While I have highlighted a few examples that illustrate the connection between payments and financial inclusion, the Fed supports and participates in several initiatives to broadly enhance these efforts. These efforts will continue to work toward fostering a U.S. economy that works for everyone.13 Payment System Improvement and International CollaborationFinally, I would like to highlight some recent Federal Reserve activities that support domestic and international payment systems improvement and responsible innovation. The U.S. financial and payment systems currently support the effective transmission of funds, and our work will continue to evaluate opportunities to improve upon an already safe and efficient system. The recent introduction of the FedNow® Service, our new interbank system for instant payments, and our commitment to adopt the ISO 20022 messaging standard for the Federal Reserve's wholesale payment service by March of next year demonstrate this ongoing effort.14 Over the longer term, the Federal Reserve will continue to conduct research and assess innovative technologies and business models to better understand their potential role in the future payments and financial ecosystem. This analysis must include a consideration of potential opportunities, risks, and tradeoffs primarily for cross-border payments and secondarily for financial inclusion. The Federal Reserve also works closely with our international counterparts on payments innovation and related topics. This includes work with multilateral institutions including the Bank for International Settlements, the G7, and the Financial Stability Board, as well as bilateral engagements with other central banks. As I've discussed today, continued collaboration among public-sector institutions and across the broader payments community will be essential for fostering progress toward a more inclusive, effective, and efficient cross-border payments system that works for everyone. ConclusionThe payments landscape is complex, and it continues to evolve in response to consumer and business needs. Policymakers must continue to consider opportunities to improve domestic and cross-border payment and settlement infrastructures and seek to further broader access to the financial system. At the same time, we must recognize that these challenges present opportunities to refine public policy decisions understanding the tradeoffs and the distinct needs and circumstances across jurisdictions and among consumers and businesses. Opportunities to discuss these issues, as we are today, are essential for creating opportunities to learn and collaborate. Our progress will likely be incremental and slow, requiring a longer-term view. The safety of our financial system requires that we get this right, and our pursuit of improvements in the payments system must avoid the temptation to rely on new technology alone. This will require us to thoughtfully consider the many policy choices that lead to these improvements. Thank you for the opportunity to share my views on these issues, and I look forward to examining them further during the upcoming panel discussion. 1. Thank you to Priyanka Slattery and Alex Sproveri of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own are and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. See Financial Stability Board,Enhancing Cross-Border Payments: Stage 1 Report to the G20(PDF)(Financial Stability Board, April 2020).Return to text 3. For more information on the G20 cross-border payments improvement roadmap and its progress, see Financial Stability Board,Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Stage 3 Roadmap(Financial Stability Board, October 2020),and Financial Stability Board,G20 Roadmap for Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Consolidated Progress Report for 2023(Financial Stability Board, October 2023).Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, January 2022).Return to text 5. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Responsible Innovation in Money and Payments" (speech at Roundtable on Central Bank Digital Currency, Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Washington, D.C., October 17, 2023).Return to text 6. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Building a More Inclusive Financial System through Collaboration and Action" (speech at the Aspen Institute, Washington, D.C., December 5, 2023).Return to text 7. Gemechu Ayana Aga and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, "International Remittances and Financial Inclusion in Sub-Saharan Africa," Policy Research Working Paper (Washington: World Bank Group, Development Research Group, July 2014). David Malpass, "Remittances Are a Critical Economic Stabilizer," World Bank Blog, December 6, 2022.Return to text 8. The World Bank,Remittance Prices Worldwide Quarterly(PDF), Issue 47, September 2023, p. 20.Return to text 9. See United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,TransformingOurWorld: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development(United Nations), and Financial Stability Board,Targets for Addressing the Four Challenges of Cross-Border Payments: Final Report(PDF)(Financial Stability Board, October 2021).Return to text 10. See "Bank On," Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund. In the United States, approximately 95.5 percent of U.S. households were "banked" in 2021, meaning that at least one member of the household held a bank account. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "2021 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF)" (July 2022).Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency Lending Principles for Making Responsible Small-Dollar Loans," SR letter 20-14 / CA letter 20-8 (May 20, 2020).Return to text 12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting," CA letter 19-11 (December 12, 2019).Return to text 13. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Building a More Inclusive Financial System through Collaboration and Action" (speech at the Aspen Institute, Washington, D.C., December 5, 2023).Return to text 14. For more information on the March 2025 implementation date, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Announces Final Timeline and Implementation Details for Adoption of New Fedwire Funds Service Message Format," press release, June 27, 2022.Return to text
The federal bank regulatory agencies and the Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and Chicago will host the 2024 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference in Portland, Oregon, March 4 to 7. The biennial conference offers participants the opportunity to learn about the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and to discuss best practices, innovations, and emerging challenges in community development with experts from around the country. The 2024 program will focus on the agencies' newCRA rule,and will include regulator-led sessions on the rule and panels on community development policy and activities. There will be pre-conference tours of local community development organizations and projects. The conference will also include a panel discussion with Federal Reserve Vice Chair for Supervision Michael J. Barr, FDIC Chairman Martin J. Gruenberg, and Acting Comptroller of the Currency Michael J. Hsu. The panel discussion will be livestreamedhere. To register for the conference and view the full agenda, visit the National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conferencewebsite.
Federal bank regulatory agencies today reported in the 2023 Shared National Credit (SNC) report that credit quality associated with large, syndicated bank loans remains moderate. However, the agencies noted declining credit quality trends due to the pressure of higher interest rates on leveraged borrowers and compressed operating margins in some industry sectors. Risks in leveraged loans remain high, and risks in certain industries, including technology, telecom and media; health care and pharmaceuticals; and transportation services are also elevated. Risk in the real estate and construction sector is segmented, with deteriorating trends in some sub-sectors being offset by stability and/or improvement in other sub-sectors. Industries affected by the pandemic, including transportation services and entertainment/recreation, continue to show notable improvement. The 2023 review reflects the examination of SNC loans originated on or before June 30, 2023. The review focused on leveraged loans and stressed borrowers from various industry sectors. The 2023 SNC portfolio included 6,589 borrowers, totaling $6.4 trillion in commitments, an increase of 8.7 percent from a year ago. The percentage of loans that deserve management's close attention ("non-pass" loans comprised of SNC commitments rated "special mention" and "classified") increased from 7.0 percent of total commitments to 8.9 percent year over year. While U.S. banks hold 46 percent of all SNC commitments, they hold only 20 percent of non-pass loans. Nearly half of total SNC commitments are leveraged, and leveraged loans comprise 86 percent of non-pass loans. 2023 SNC Program Review Report (PDF)
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the American Bankers Association 2024 Conference for Community Bankers, San Antonio, Texas Thank you for the invitation to join you in San Antonio today for the ABA's Conference for Community Bankers.1This conference provides an opportunity for bankers, state and federal regulators, and other policymakers to share perspectives on banking and other related financial topics. The ability to exchange ideas is critical to ensuring efficient and effective outcomes in the regulation and supervision of financial services activities. Policymakers should seek to fully understand the direct and indirect consequences of regulation and supervision—and any changes that might be considered to existing expectations. One of the best, and most effective ways to gain this understanding is through direct engagement with bankers, bank customers, and other stakeholders about potential consequences. Engaging with the public, being transparent about policy goals, and hearing from industry participants—enables us to craft more efficient and effective rules and enhance our ability to execute our supervisory responsibilities. This public engagement is particularly important now, when so many factors are in play that will likely reshape the contours of the banking industry. Bank business models are adapting to technology changes, including new opportunities for third-party partnerships and new risks from increasingly sophisticated cyber criminals. We've seen some traditional banking activities continue to migrate into nonbank financial service providers, and regulators have implemented or proposed—or are considering proposing—significant changes to the bank regulatory framework, some of which could have broad impacts on the future of banking and on our current understanding of the community banking model. A broad range of policymakers continue to consider the root causes of the banking stress from last spring and whether changes are needed to achieve greater resilience and accountability, both among banks and among regulators. While many of the most significant changes have occurred in the larger bank space, community banks have been and will continue to be affected by these dynamics. Increasingly, community banks must devote a greater proportion of their resources to compliance and risk management. Even those changes that exclude community banks on their face present the prospect of regulatory "trickle down," either through market forces and expectations, or through pressure exerted by bank examiners in the course of supervision. In considering this ongoing evolution of the banking system, I think it is useful to go back to first principles: What is a community bank, and why does it matter? What Is a Community Bank?The question "What is a community bank?" has no clearly defined answer. One may simply point to regulatory standards, where the current definition sets a threshold at $10 billion in consolidated assets; firms below this threshold are "community banking organizations." Some regulations, like the newly finalized rules implementing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), depart from this regulatory definition altogether to impose lower thresholds, applying a $600 million threshold in defining a "small bank" and a $2 billion threshold in defining an "intermediate bank."2Notably, the regulatory definition—an asset-sized based approach—is not the only way one could define a community bank. In fact, even in the current regulatory framework, there is variability in how we define different categories of institutions; for example, global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) are defined using multi-factor tests that take into account a range of factors, including not only size but also interconnectedness, complexity, cross-jurisdictional activity, substitutability, and short-term wholesale funding.3 Of course, a test designed to identify G-SIBs is really not suitable to define other categories of institutions, particularly community banks. But it is helpful to consider what broader lessons we can learn from other parts of the regulatory framework, and how these might illuminate areas for improvement when it comes to bank definitions. For example, there are a number of differences that distinguish a "community bank" from larger peers. Let's consider the structure of a community bank. A community bank tends to have a simple organizational structure, operating either as a standalone bank, or as a bank subsidiary of a shell holding company. Often, these banks will have few, if any, subsidiaries or affiliates, and their activities tend to differ from those of larger and more complex peers, focusing on traditional banking activities. These banks also compete differently—often with a heavy reliance on relationship banking—focusing on business segments where they have unique, competitive advantages, like in small business lending and a targeted focus on the banking needs of local communities. Many of these factors go to the character of the organization, which may not change even after a bank crosses a particular asset size threshold. While these many factors distinguish what is considered a community bank from other banking models, the simpler approach—a pure asset-size-based definition—persists as the key distinguishing factor in the regulatory framework.4To the extent that there are deviations from this approach, such as in the recent push to treat banks engaged in "novel activities" differently, these deviations move only in one direction, effectively subjecting targeted firms to accelerated examination cycles; imposing additional supervisory screens during examinations, and in practice, holding them to stricter supervisory standards including those related to risk management, capital, and liquidity. When we try to adjust based on firm-specific characteristics, the result is always the imposition of higher standards. A bank with more than $10 billion in assets is never treated as a community bank under the regulatory framework, and indeed, even a traditional community bank must prepare to comply with additional regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations as it approaches the $10-billion asset size threshold. Frankly, we should ask ourselves whether this is the best approach. It may very well be appropriate to impose heightened standards on a bank even if it has less than $10 billion in assets, depending on that bank's underlying risk profile and its business activities. But by the same token, we should consider whether banks above the $10 billion threshold are more akin to traditional community banks, notwithstanding exceeding this regulatory asset threshold. And if they are, whether different rules and standards would be more appropriate. Fairness and Community BanksAt least as important as the question of "What is a community bank?" is how the regulatory system treats this type of bank, and whether this treatment is appropriate. All banks are held to high standards, but we must consider the risks and implications of over-calibration of supervisory standards and regulatory requirements. Additional regulation and heightened supervisory expectations are not cost-free, particularly for community banks that may have limited resources, especially when we consider the cumulative impact of existing and proposed regulations. Over-calibration occurs when the resulting requirements are disproportionate to the underlying risks, and over-calibration can pose a threat to the viability of the community banking model. More is not always better, and imposing ever higher standards may actually frustrate safety and soundness goals, pushing activity to the non-bank financial system.5 When considering these two questions—how we define, and how the regulatory framework treats, community banks—we must consider an approach that takes into account fairness. In my view, a "fair" approach is one that strives to achieve appropriate calibration. And without question, fairness ensures that we preserve the role of these important banks in the banking system. We know the role that community banks play is important to the financial system, with an unparalleled focus on local communities and unique expertise in certain lending activities, like lending to small- and medium-sized businesses. But often, "fairness" for community banks often appears to be a non-factor when considering which proposals make the regulatory agenda, particularly in an environment where bank regulation and supervision of larger institutions was shown to have faced significant challenges around the banking stress in March of last year. In the aftermath of supervisory inattention, the primary response among regulators appears to be to crank the dial up to 11 on regulatory requirements.6This has involved shifting to a more strict approach for the supervision of all institutions, even for those that had robust risk management, business models designed to be more resilient to interest rate changes, and less concentrated customer exposures. While higher regulatory requirements and stricter supervisory standards across the board may reduce risk in the banking system on a superficial level, it does so at substantial cost to banks, their customers, and to the broader economy. To be sure, many factors influence the path of regulatory reform. One of the key issues that has guided bank regulatory reform since the 2008 financial crisis has been how we address the problem of banks that are "too big to fail." Many of the reforms that stemmed from the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act were intended to address this problem. By contrast, statutory reforms since that time have largely been focused on "right-sizing" the regulatory framework, requiring regulatory tailoring for firms above $100 billion in assets, raising the threshold for enhanced prudential standards from its initial $50 billion asset threshold, and increasing the statutory threshold for periodic firm-run stress testing requirements from a $10 billion threshold to $250 billion.7The debate about regulatory "right-sizing" has generally focused on larger firms, and in some ways, both the emergency actions taken last spring, and the ensuing regulatory reform requirements, force us to ask whether these reform efforts have, perversely, entrenched the too-big-to-fail expectations around larger firms. As community banks consider all of the applicable regulations, guidance, and recent bank regulatory reform efforts, I expect they ask themselves, "What is the overarching objective of the federal banking regulators?" And "What is really the goal here?" When asked, policymakers will tell you that a diversity of banks—with a range of sizes, locations, and activities—contributes to the strength of the banking system, and that community banks play a particularly vital role for many bank customers and communities. Yet this can be hard to square with policy actions, especially those taken in recent times. While reform efforts may be well-intentioned, when the effect of reforms over time is to erode the ongoing viability of different banking models, especially the community banking model, I think we need to do some soul-searching about what sort of banking system we want, and how the bank regulatory framework can best support a banking system that is not only safe and sound, but efficient. Cumulative Burden and the Policy ResponseIn my mind, one of the greatest threats to smaller banks' business models comes not from any one regulatory reform initiative or changed expectations in supervision but rather from the cumulative impact. The tendency of policymakers can be to add new regulations, guidance, and supervisory expectations, becoming more and more prescriptive and creating an ever-larger body of material that a banker must digest and apply over time. At some point, however, this overwhelming body of material (more than 5,000 pages just last year) is simply undigestible by the individual or small staff at a community bank primarily responsible for making sure the bank meets all relevant expectations. This begs the questions: How should policymakers approach regulation and supervision in a world with so many competing priorities, each one of which may seem important on a standalone basis? And how can we maintain a bank regulatory framework that is "fair" for community banks? My recommendations will sound familiar to those who have followed my past remarks. First, I think we need to focus on effective prioritization of risks, particularly for the smaller and community banks. While we should not ignore new and evolving risks, we know that certain core risks arealwaysimportant in the sound management of a bank—for example, credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk, succession planning, and information technology. Particularly in the wake of some supervisory gaps in the lead up to the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, one response by bank examiners could be to simply flag as many issues as possible. However, we must be very careful not to assess the effectiveness of the supervisory process by thequantityof findings documented in examination reports. Quantity alone does not tell us that we have identified the right issues or taken appropriate steps to ensure these issues are addressed in a timely way. Prioritizing the quantity of findings over quality creates a serious risk of distracting bank management from core risks. When it comes to non-core risks, or emerging risks, it is incumbent upon bankers to manage risks that may be material based on, among other things, their business model and activities. The role of regulators is to support banks in these efforts—and to help identify any non-core risks or emerging risks that banks may have overlooked—but not to push down a one-size-fits-all set of requirements or expectations that are designed for larger banks or that may be irrelevant under a community banking model. Second, I think it is important to improve transparency and predictability in the bank regulatory framework. Uncertainty is a significant contributor to the cumulative burden on community banks. One area where this concern is particularly acute is in the bank merger application process. About a year ago when I spoke at this conference, I mentioned the growing public focus on the role of federal banking regulators in reviewing merger applications.8This past year certainly hasn't improved the outlook for the bank merger process. While the idiosyncratic features of each bank merger transaction can make it difficult to predict how long the regulatory approval process may take, I remain concerned about delays in average processing times and that subsequent regulatory actions could lead to further delays. But community bank mergers are often simpler than mergers of larger organizations and may be critical to preserve local banking options. These banks may have fewer options than their larger peers to raise capital or grow their banking business, so preserving the availability of merger transactions is important for the health and longevity of community banking. In this context, application processing delays can be quite harmful, resulting in greater operational risk, increased expenses, and staff attrition due to the prolonged uncertainty. Supervision can also be an additional source of risk for banks. Of course, supervision is an important tool and, when used properly, can often be a very efficient tool to promote safety and soundness. But when supervisory standards become volatile and unpredictable, banks may have significant trouble meeting regulatory expectations. As I have previously noted, one of the concerning trends in 2023 were reports, including from state banking regulators, that some federal supervisory actions were excessive, considering the risks posed by some smaller institutions.9Regulatory "surprises"—shifting expectations that are not announced or socialized prior to an examination and are discovered only through the issuance of supervisory findings—leave banks in the unfortunate position of failing to meet regulatory expectations not through inattention to risk or management shortcomings, but simply by not having the ability to divine what those new standards are. While change is inevitable in supervision—change in response to broader economic trends, changes in banking best practices, and changes to a bank's business model and activities—opaque and shifting regulatory standards can exacerbate these risks for bank management. Finally, one of the core principles for effective regulation and supervision—to reduce the incremental burden, especially for the smaller regional and community banks—is tailoring. While important for all institutions, tailoring is particularly important for community banks. Effective and efficient regulation and supervision must be calibrated to the activities and risks of the community banking model, and the tradeoffs and unintended consequences carefully considered. In addition to the Basel proposal, one of the most consequential regulatory developments over the past year was the finalization of revisions to the regulations implementing the CRA. The new regulatory thresholds under this final rule define a "small bank" and an "intermediate bank" to include only the smallest community banks. All banks with more than $2 billion are deemed to be large. As I noted at the time the final rule was approved, the lack of recognition that these banks are fundamentally different, with different balance sheets and business models, represents a missed opportunity to appropriately tailor CRA expectations to a bank's size, risk, service area, and business model.10I remain convinced that it is not sensible bank regulatory policy to apply the same evaluation standards to a bank with $2 billion in assets and to a bank with $2 trillion in assets. Another missed opportunity is with supervisory guidance, which can also be a significant source of risk for banks. For example, the federal banking agencies published third-party risk-management guidance that applies to all banks, including community banks. And yet, as I noted at the time, this guidance had known shortcomings even at the time it was published, shortcomings that were not addressed in advance by the agencies.11While I expect that the agencies will eventually publish additional resources to assist community banks, I am concerned that the timing lag here posed an unnecessary cost on those expected to meet the new expectations, and that materials to facilitate compliance will not do enough to mitigate the additional burden imposed on those attempting to comply with these new expectations. Closing ThoughtsI have spoken in the past about the implications of the over-calibration of bank capital requirements, the risks of regulators focusing on matters that are tangential to statutory mandates and critical areas of responsibility, and how regulators can work in a productive way to support responsible innovation in the banking system.12Over-calibration of regulation and supervision as it applies to smaller and community banks can often be even more consequential, jeopardizing the ongoing viability of the community banking business model, at a significant cost to the communities, individuals, and businesses that rely on the that bank for important banking products and services. Before I conclude my remarks, though, I would like to note that on February 6 of this year, the Board announced that it is seeking comment on the interagency effort to reduce regulatory burden, a process that occurs every 10 years as mandated by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996.13It is critical that policymakers hear from you and other stakeholders during this process. Your input will help us to identify and eventually amend regulations that are no longer necessary or are overly burdensome. I look forward to your in put during this review. Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss these important issues with you today. 1. The views expressed in these remarks are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Community Reinvestment Act,89 Fed. Reg. at 7109 (defining "intermediate bank"), and 7110 (defining "small bank") (PDF).Return to text 3. 12 CFR 217.404 (Method 1 score) and 217.405 (Method 2 score).Return to text 4. While some research has considered additional factors beyond size for purposes of studying community banks, relevant regulatory definitions remain based on asset size. See FDIC, "FDIC Community Banking Study," (December 2020), athttps://www.fdic.gov/resources/community-banking/report/2020/2020-cbi-study-full.pdf.Return to text 5. See Michelle W. Bowman,"The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform" (PDF)(speech at Protect Main Street event, Washington, D.C., January 17, 2024).Return to text 6. SeeThis Is Spinal Tap, directed by Rob Reiner (1984).Return to text 7. Public Law 115–174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018), § 401(a).Return to text 8. See Michelle W. Bowman,"Independence, Predictability, and Tailoring in Banking Regulation and Supervision" (PDF)(speech at the American Bankers Association Community Banking Conference, Orlando, Florida, February 13, 2023).Return to text 9. See Michelle W. Bowman,"New Year's Resolutions for Bank Regulatory Policymakers," (PDF)(speech at the South Carolina Bankers Association 2024 Community Bankers Conference, Columbia, South Carolina, January 8, 2024).Return to text 10. See dissenting statement,"Statement on the Community Reinvestment Act Final Rule by Governor Michelle W. Bowman,"news release, October 24, 2023.Return to text 11. See Statement on Third Party Risk Management Guidance by Governor Michelle W. Bowman (June 6, 2023) ("… Federal Reserve regional bank supervisors have indicated that we should provide additional resources for community banks upon implementation to provide appropriate expectations and ensure that small banks understand and can effectively use the guidance to inform their third-party risk management processes…. I am disappointed that the agencies failed to make the upfront investment to reduce unnecessary confusion and burden on community banks"), athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bowman-statement-20230606.htm.Return to text 12. See Michelle W. Bowman,"The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform" (PDF)(speech at Protect Main Street event, Washington, D.C., January 17, 2024); Michelle W. Bowman,"The Future of Banking" (PDF)(speech at the 157th Assembly for Bank Directors, Southwestern Graduate School of Banking, Maui, Hawaii February 2, 2024); and Michelle W. Bowman,"The Innovation Imperative: Modernizing Traditional Banking" (PDF)(speech at the Independent Community Bankers of America ICBA Live 2023 Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, March 14, 2023).Return to text 13. See Statement by Michelle W. Bowman,"Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Seek Comment on Interagency Effort to Reduce Regulatory Burden,"news release.Return to text
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced their first of a series of requests for comment to reduce regulatory burden. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 requires the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council and federal bank regulatory agencies to review their regulations every 10 years to identify any outdated or otherwise unnecessary regulatory requirements for their supervised institutions. To facilitate this review, the agencies divided their regulations into 12 categories and are first soliciting comments on their regulations in three categories: Applications and Reporting, Powers and Activities, and International Operations. Comments on the relevant regulations will be accepted for 90 days after publication in theFederal Register. Over the next two years, the agencies will request comment on the regulations in the remaining categories, asking the public to identify regulations they believe are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. The agencies also plan to hold outreach meetings where interested parties may comment on applicable regulatory requirements directly to the agencies. Information about the outreach meetings will be publicized as details are finalized. Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Publication and Review Under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act website Statement by Governor Bowman
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the proposal by Atlantic Union Bankshares Corporation, Richmond, Virginia, to merge with American National Bankshares Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire American National's subsidiary bank, American National Bank and Trust Company, both of Danville, Virginia. The Board also gave its approval for Atlantic Union Bank, Richmond Virginia, to merge with American National Bank and for Atlantic Union Bank to establish and operate branches at locations of American National Bank. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the termination of the enforcement actions listed below: Société Générale S.A., Paris, France, and Société Générale New York Branch, New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated December 14, 2017 (PDF)Terminated February 26, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of an enforcement action with Farmington State Bank, of Farmington, Washington, and its holding company, FBH Corporation. The Board's enforcement action, which has been in effect since July 2023, ensured the bank's operations would wind down in a manner that protected the bank's depositors. Farmington has completed its wind down plan and no longer functions as a bank. Also on Tuesday, the Board announced the termination of two enforcement actions with BNP Paribas, of Paris, France. Both enforcement actions have been in effect since June 2014 and required BNP Paribas to implement a program to ensure global compliance with U.S. sanctions laws. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Peoples-Marion Bancorp, Inc., Marion, Kentucky and The Peoples Bank, Marion, KentuckyWritten Agreement dated January 22, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Select Bank, Forest, VirginiaFlood insurance violations, civil money penalty, dated February 9, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released the hypothetical scenarios for its annual stress test, which helps ensure that large banks can lend to households and businesses even in a severe recession. Additionally, for the first time, the Board released four hypothetical elements designed to probe different risks through its "exploratory analysis" of the banking system. The exploratory analysis will not affect bank capital requirements. The Board's annual stress test evaluates the resilience of large banks by estimating losses, net revenue, and capital levels—which provide a cushion against losses—under hypothetical recession scenarios that extend two years into the future. This year, 32 banks will be tested against a severe global recession with heightened stress in both commercial and residential real estate markets, as well as in corporate debt markets. The scenarios are not forecasts and should not be interpreted as predictions of future economic conditions. In the 2024 stress test scenario, the U.S. unemployment rate rises nearly 6-1/2 percentage points, to a peak of 10 percent. The increase in the unemployment rate is accompanied by severe market volatility, a widening of corporate bond spreads, and a collapse in asset prices, including a 36 percent decline in house prices and a 40 percent decline in commercial real estate prices. Large banks with substantial trading or custodial operations are also required to incorporate a counterparty default scenario component to estimate and report potential losses and capital effects associated with the unexpected default of the firm's largest counterparty. In addition, banks with large trading operations will be tested against a global market shock component that primarily stresses their trading and related positions. The global market shock component is a set of hypothetical stresses to a large set of risk factors reflecting market distress and heightened uncertainty. The table below shows the components of the annual stress test that apply to each bank, based on data as of the third quarter of 2023. This year's exploratory analysis includes four separate hypothetical elements that will assess the resilience of the banking system to a wider range of risks. Two of the hypothetical elements include funding stresses that cause a rapid repricing of a large proportion of deposits at large banks. Each element has a different set of interest rate and economic conditions, including a moderate recession with increasing inflation and rising interest rates, and a severe global recession with high and persistent inflation and rising interest rates. The other two elements of the exploratory analysis include two sets of market shocks that will be applied only to the largest and most complex banks. These shocks hypothesize the failure of five large hedge funds, with each under a different set of financial market conditions. Those conditions include expectations of reduced global economic activity with a negative outlook for long-term inflation, and expectations of severe recessions in the United States and other countries. The exploratory analysis is distinct from the stress test and will explore additional hypothetical risks to the broader banking system, rather than focusing on firm-specific results. The Board will publish aggregate results alongside the annual stress test results in June 2024. 1. The information listed in this table is based on third quarter 2023 data.Return to text For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. 2024 Stress Test Scenarios (PDF) Exploratory Analysis of Risks to the Banking System (PDF) Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests 2024
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Adam, and thank you to Peterson for the opportunity to speak to you today. Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I will take this opportunity to share with you my outlook on the U.S. economy and some upside and downside risks to which I am paying special attention. Also, I will review past monetary policy cycles and discuss what lessons we may learn from them. With that, let me turn to my outlook for the U.S. economy. Aggregate Economic ActivityGrowth in real gross domestic product in 2023 came in much higher than expected by most professional forecasters, buoyed by strength in consumer spending. Toward the end of 2023, however, household balance sheets began to weaken, as indicated by higher delinquency rates and a further decline in savings. These developments lead me to expect slower growth in spending and output in 2024. Even so, without a clear understanding of why consumer spending has been so resilient, I see continuing strength in spending as an important upside risk to my forecast. One possible explanation is that consumers do not want to give up previous levels of consumption, perhaps because of habit formation as described by Robert Pollak (1970) and an optimistic view of future income prospects. Another possibility is the one raised in pioneering work by James Duesenberry (1949) 75 years ago and later developed in the context of modern macroeconomics by Jordi Gali (1994). Socially motivated consumption—or "keeping up with the Joneses"—could cause individuals to consume more than what is predicted by models that only consider household wealth and income. The Labor MarketThe imbalance between labor demand and labor supply has narrowed, as labor demand has cooled while labor supply has improved. There is evidence of cooling labor demand, such as the decline in job openings by 3 million from their peak in March 2022. Nevertheless, the labor market remains tight and job openings remain about 20 percent above their pre-pandemic level, as shown infigure 1. At the same time, layoffs have remained very low, and the pace of payroll employment gains remains strong, with nonfarm payroll monthly job gains in the past three months averaging 289,000. The unemployment rate in January was 3.7 percent, a level that is still near historical lows. The fact that the unemployment rate and layoffs have remained low in the U.S. economy over the past year amid disinflation suggests that there is a path to restoring price stability without the kind of substantial increase in unemployment that has often accompanied significant tightening cycles. The Inflation OutlookInflation made clear progress over 2023 toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective. I believe that this progress reflects both the unwinding of pandemic-related supply and demand distortions in the economy as well as restrictive monetary policy, which has cooled strong demand and given the supply side of the economy time to catch up. As shown infigure 2, over the 12 months ended in January, the Federal Reserve's staff estimates that total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.4 percent, down from 5.5 percent over the preceding 12 months. Core PCE prices, which excludes energy and food prices, rose 2.8 percent, down from 4.9 percent. The figures for January are estimates that incorporate the somewhat larger consumer price index (CPI) increase we saw last month. That disappointing CPI reading highlights that the disinflation process is likely to be bumpy. The January data notwithstanding, the slowing in core inflation has been especially pronounced in recent months, as the 3- and 6-month changes in core PCE prices through January, at 2.5 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively, clearly remain below the 12-month change shown in figure 2. The most striking moderation has been in core goods prices, as shown infigure 3, which have declined outright over the past year. Inflation in core services, both in its housing component and nonhousing services, has also slowed, but not as much. I believe that as the labor market continues to cool, core services price increases will continue to moderate. Of course, I remain attentive to other possibilities. A Longer-Term Perspective on Monetary Policy CyclesNext, I would like to highlight key aspects of past monetary policy cycles and what lessons we may learn from these past experiences. For exposition purposes, my review focuses on easing cycles and their preceding peak-rate episodes that extend back to 1989; however, I also will make some comments on an important episode prior to 1989.1As of our last meeting in January, my colleagues on the FOMC and I believe that our policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle and that, if the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back policy restraint at some point this year. I will therefore start with a description of economic conditions during past peak-rate episodes, given where we are today. The first column oftable 1lists the dates of the latest six peak-rate episodes preceding easing cycles, defined as a sequence of rate cuts without rate hikes in between. The second and third columns summarize economic conditions as described in official accounts of monetary policy released at the time, such as FOMC statements, minutes of Committee meetings, and the Federal Reserve Board's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. The table also records inflation at the time of the peak rate as measured by the 12-month percent change in headline and core PCE price indexes.2 My main inference is that most of the time, in five out of the six episodes, the peak rate is reached once inflation is contained, albeit in some cases with risks still present. There is only one exception in this sample, the March 1989 to May 1989 peak-rate episode, when inflation was elevated—noted in the first row of the table. The easing cycle following this particular peak-rate episode began as core and headline PCE inflation were starting to come down from an elevated level, as illustrated infigure 4.3This figure shows headline and core inflation two years before and after the start date of each of the six easing cycles. The red line, which corresponds to the March 1989 peak-rate episode, stands out, with core PCE inflation at 4 percent at the beginning of the easing cycle, while all the other easing cycles show core PCE inflation at about 2 percent at commencement. Our situation today is closer to the norm during these episodes than to the exception, as PCE inflation is closer to 2 percent than to 4 percent. Table 2summarizes the reasons given in Federal Reserve documents at the time to explain the rationale for easing policy. When studying monetary policy cycles, it is important to recognize the often-multistage nature of cycles and, because of this, table 2 distinguishes between the reasons underpinning the start of the easing cycle, listed in column 2, and those underpinning subsequent easings, listed in column 3. One clear example of a cycle with different phases and involving more than one reason for easing is the most recent easing cycle—the one listed in the last row—which took place between August 2019 and March 2020. The initial 75 basis points of easing in this cycle were a result of downside risks to the U.S. economy due to weaker global growth and high trade uncertainties. The subsequent easings in this cycle were due to the disruptions to the economy resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Looking at table 2, two facts stand out. First, most easing cycles start because of concern about slowing economic growth. In table 2, the one exception is the easing cycle that started in July 1995 and is associated with what Alan Blinder (2023) has labeled a "perfect soft landing" example.4That particular easing cycle started predominantly because of reduced inflation concerns. All the other easing cycles started because either there was a concern about slowing economic growth, or, in one case, because there was a concern about slowing economic growth and there were reduced inflation concerns. The second fact that stands out is that history is replete with events that complicate monetary policy decisions. The third column in table 2, which notes the reasons for subsequent easings, demonstrates this point. It shows that four out of the six easing cycles had multiple "easing phases," with later phases triggered by events like the 1991 Gulf War, the 9/11 terrorist attack, the Global Financial Crisis, and the pandemic. These events required policymakers to take a different course of policy easing from the course they may have anticipated earlier in the cycle. Specifically, because these events contributed to the contraction of economic activity, policymakers may have accelerated policy easing. The main messages that I see emerging from this review of the record are that policymakers need to remain vigilant and nimble, in case of adverse shocks hitting the economy, and that policymakers need some good luck. The lesson that policymakers need to remain vigilant and nimble is further illustrated infigure 5, which shows the unemployment rate around the start of each easing cycle. As can be seen from this chart, in some easing cycles—for example, the easing cycles that began in January 2001, shown in blue, and September 2007, shown in green—the unemployment rate ramps up quickly, shortly after the easing cycle began. In both these cases, the economy weakened rapidly. In the easing cycle that began in January 2001, moderating growth over the second half of 2000 gave way abruptly to sluggish growth around the end of the year. Economic weakness spread and intensified over the first half of 2001 and—as shown by the blue line—a year after the easing cycle began, the unemployment rate had increased just short of 2 percentage points. In the easing cycle that began in September 2007, the macroeconomic data were not showing much weakening at the time of the cycle's first couple of rate cuts, although financial markets were exhibiting heightened and broad-based volatility and short-term funding markets were significantly impaired. It was only in December 2007 that incoming data started to show more significant spillovers of the housing downturn to other parts of the economy, while several financial firms also began to report larger-than-expected losses. As the green line in the chart shows, the unemployment rate was around 4-1/2 percent at the start of the 2007–08 easing cycle—having remained broadly stable around that level in 2006—but then rapidly rose to 6 percent within a year of the first easing. My motivation for discussing these two episodes is to highlight how quickly economic activity can weaken. Another reason why policymakers need to watch all available information and be nimble in their decisionmaking is that developments concerning inflation can likewise change rapidly. This was highlighted recently by Russia's invasion of Ukraine in March 2022. The invasion compounded the effects of post-pandemic supply constraints on inflation. In addition, we always need to keep in mind the danger of easing too much in response to improvements in the inflation picture. Excessive easing can lead to a stalling or reversal in progress in restoring price stability. Former Fed Chair Paul Volcker stressed this danger in a 1981 speech, when he pointed to 1967 as a year when monetary policy eased in response to concerns about slowing economic growth and reduced inflation concerns, yet inflation subsequently turned back up. Finally, another observation from reviewing past episodes is that careful easing in the July 1995 easing cycle allowed the FOMC to assess incoming data and other information to make sure that inflation was under control. As I noted earlier, the July 1995 easing cycle is associated with the so-called perfect soft landing. In this particular easing cycle, the FOMC started to ease as it observed a lessening in inflation concerns, left rates unchanged for three meetings as it waited for more information, and then continued to ease. Lessons for Current Monetary PolicyWith the knowledge of past experiences in hand, let me say a few words about the current monetary policy cycle and the extent to which future policy is likely to resemble, if at all, past experiences. Between March 2022 and July 2023, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate 5-1/4 percentage points. Our strong actions have moved our policy rate well into restrictive territory, and our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back our policy restraint later this year. Getting back to the title of my talk today: Will this time be different? My answer is, of course it will. Every time is different. But we can still learn from past episodes. We cannot know if there will be unanticipated exogenous shocks that require a policy response different from what will be envisaged at the beginning of the easing cycle. All we can do is assess the risks as best we can, given the available information and our best forecasts. In the absence of unanticipated exogenous shocks, policymakers can weigh multiple factors, including keeping policy restrictive enough to tamp down a possible resurgence of inflation due to the strength of aggregate demand or easing sooner to avoid an undue increase in unemployment. Unfortunately, the history that I have reviewed today suggests that we should not be surprised if some kind of unanticipated shock occurs. Given that we must accept that uncertainty is present, we consider the risks that can affect our outlook and forecasts. Looking ahead, I see at least three key risks. First, as I mentioned at the beginning, consumer spending could be even more resilient than I currently expect it to be, which could cause progress on inflation to stall. Second, employment could weaken as the factors supporting economic growth fade. Third, geopolitical risks could remain elevated, and a widening of the conflict in the Middle East could have greater effects on commodity prices, such as oil, and on global financial markets. I remain cautiously optimistic about our progress on inflation, and I will be reviewing the totality of incoming data in assessing the economic outlook and the risks surrounding the outlook and in judging the appropriate future course of monetary policy. ReferencesBlinder, Alan S. (2023). "Landings, Soft and Hard: The Federal Reserve, 1965–2022,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 37 (Winter), pp. 101–20. Duesenberry, James S. (1949).Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumption Behavior.Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Galí, Jordi (1994). "Keeping up with the Joneses: Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice, and Asset Prices,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 26 (February), pp. 1–8. Lindsey, David (2003). "A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975–2002 (PDF)," memorandum, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, June 24. Pollak, Robert, A. (1970). "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 78 (4, part 1), pp. 745–63. Stigum, Marcia, and Anthony Crescenzi (2007).Stigum's Money Market,4th ed. McGraw-Hill. Volcker, Paul (1981). "Dealing with Inflation: Obstacles and Opportunities," speech delivered at the Alfred M. Landon Lecture Series on Public Issues, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, April 15. 1. The start date of 1989 is motivated by the fact that this was the earliest cycle in which the FOMC was viewed as considering monetary policy actions in terms of discrete 25 basis point, 50 basis point, etc., rate moves in the federal funds rate target and, as such, is more comparable to today. See Stigum and Crescenzi (2007) for a discussion of the FOMC's increased focus on federal funds rate targeting in the late 1980s as well as Lindsey (2003), who describes the FOMC's further shift toward targeting the federal funds rate in 1989 by discontinuing the practice of targeting borrowed reserves.Return to text 2. The PCE inflation numbers in table 1 are revised data, which means the data that policymakers were reviewing at the time—the so-called real-time data—could have been different. In addition, for some of these cycles, policymakers focused on CPI inflation more than PCE inflation. Also, note that while the table frequently references inflation relative to a 2 percent rate, it was only for the last peak-rate episode for which the FOMC had established a 2 percent rate of inflation to be most consistent over the longer run with its price-stability goal, per its first "Statement on Longer-run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy" adopted in January 2012.Return to text 3. The data shown in figure 4 are revised data.Return to text 4. Blinder (2023) labels the July 1995 episode as the "perfect soft landing" and identifies other "softish" landings (see his Table 1, page 119). Blinder (2023) defines a softish landing as an outcome in which real GDP declines by less than 1 percent or there is no NBER recession for at least a year after an FOMC tightening cycle.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on January 22 and January 31, 2024. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on January 30–31, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJanuary 30–31, 2024:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, Florida Governor Bowman presented identical remarks to the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Tampa, Florida, on February 28, 2024. I would like to thank the Florida Bankers Association and your new President and CEO, Kathy Kraninger, for the invitation to share my thoughts with you today.1It is really a pleasure to join you here in Florida to discuss current trends in bank regulation, and to learn the issues on your mind, especially about the path of regulatory reform, and your views on local banking and economic conditions in the communities you serve. I find great value in spending time outside of Washington, D.C. These conversations provide valuable insights to inform my work at the Federal Reserve—both for my understanding of the economy and the banking environment. Before discussing bank regulation, I would like to briefly touch on the economy and monetary policy. Monetary PolicyOver the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our most recent meeting in January, we voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. We have seen progress on inflation over the past year, with the 12-month readings through December of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation both below 3 percent for the first time since the spring of 2021. However, the latest consumer price index (CPI) and producer price index (PPI) inflation data through January suggest slower progress in bringing inflation down toward our 2 percent target. Throughout this time, economic activity has remained strong with ongoing strength in consumer spending. We had also seen signs of the labor market coming into better balance, but recent strong jobs reports—including upward revisions to employment growth—show a continued tight labor market. Last year, the average pace of job gains slowed and the labor force participation rate rose through November, with the unemployment rate edging up to 3.7 percent. In recent months, however, job growth has rebounded and the labor force participation rate declined, retracing some of its earlier gains. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance is restrictive and appears to be appropriately calibrated to reduce inflationary pressures. As I've noted recently, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady, but I still see a number of upside inflation risks that affect my outlook. These include risks from geopolitical developments, including the risk of spillovers from geopolitical conflicts and the extent to which food and energy markets and supply chains remain exposed to these influences. There is also the risk that a loosening in financial conditions and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation, as illustrated by the uptick in 12-month core services CPI inflation in January. Recent labor market data suggest ongoing elevated wage growth as some businesses continue to report above-average wage increases to compensate for elevated prices and high inflation. Given these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years, as seen in the most recent employment report, make the task of assessing the current state of the economy as well as predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging, and I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. Should the incoming data continue to indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower our policy rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. In my view, we are not yet at that point. Reducing our policy rate too soon could result in requiring further future policy rate increases to return inflation to 2 percent in the longer run. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a restrictive level that will bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, I remain willing to raise the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. Notable Developments in Bank RegulationTurning back to bank regulation and supervision, as I look at the bank regulatory framework agenda, I am struck by the sheer volume of matters that have recently been completed, that have been proposed, and that are in the pipeline. These reforms touch on a wide range of topics that directly or indirectly impact banks of all sizes. I expect that the regulatory agenda will remain very active for the foreseeable future, adding further to the already significant collection of rules, guidance, and supervisory changes made to date. While I supported some of these recent changes, the vast number of finalized, proposed, and potential changes suggest a lack of prioritization—whether we have effectively identified actual risks to the banking system and devoted resources to the most pressing of these issues. The significant volume of revisions also poses a real problem for banks that must review, provide feedback, and implement changes. The primary goal of prudential bank regulation and supervision is to promote a safe and sound banking system. Although policymakers may agree on this shared objective, we sometimes disagree on the best path to achieve it. As we consider modifications to our regulatory framework, an important question arises abouthowwe identify and implement areas for change. To be sure, we should focus on the areas of greatest risk, addressing known vulnerabilities and shoring up the framework to address emerging risks. But we also need to focus on efficiency, efficiency in how wedeliveron our safety and soundness goals, and how regulatory reforms affect the banking market, the economy, and those who use banking services. We should also ensure, in our pursuit of reform, that our efforts result in a bank framework that is appropriately tailored and calibrated. So today, I will offer my reflections on bank regulation, focusing on notable recent developments. As I have said in the past, more is not always better when it comes to the rules, guidance, expectations, and supervisory standards that apply to banks.2In many ways, more can be counterproductive and harmful when it comes to regulatory reform. When reforms are disproportionate to risk or fail to promote safety and soundness in an efficient way, those changes can harm the competitiveness of the U.S. banking system, impede the ability of banks to manage their risks, and even result in the allocation of capital by regulators instead of by bank management. Even if the consequences of reforms are unintended, we must consider those consequences and how they may shape the future of the banking system. Recently, we have seen many rule revisions, proposals, and ideas for reform, including supervisory reform. I expect that this activity will continue to feature prominently in the coming months. Capital ReformStarting with the proposed changes to bank capital requirements, as you all know, the federal banking agencies have published several proposed reforms to the capital framework. These include proposals to implement Basel III "endgame" capital reforms, to reform the G-SIB surcharge, and to introduce new long-term debt requirements for all banks with over $100 billion in assets. These reforms pose real challenges in striking the right balance between safety and soundness on the one hand, and efficiency and fairness on the other. Capital plays a critical role in promoting the safe and sound operation of banks and supporting confidence in the broader banking system. Higher levels of capital improve a bank's resilience to stress and increases the capacity of a bank to absorb losses, protecting depositors, the deposit insurance fund, and other creditors. At the same time, capital has a cost, and regulatory capital requirements apply to all banks, not just to those that fail. Higher capital requirements generally are passed through to customers in the form of increased costs for financial services, or ultimately reduced availability of these services in the market. The cost of bank capital also influences whether activities occur within the banking system or in non-bank entities outside the banking system. So, the question then becomes, what's next? The Basel comment period has closed, as has the comment period for submission of information for the quantitative impact study. The agencies continue to review the extensive stakeholder feedback and identify key areas of concern. This deliberative process should help regulators better understand the implications of the proposed capital changes—both the scale of the proposed change in capital requirements and the tradeoffs between the benefits of increased safety and soundness compared to the intended and unintended consequences. Since the proposal was published, the agencies received numerous comments identifying elements of the proposal that will have significant downstream effects on consumers, businesses, and the broader economy. Therefore, regulators need to thoroughly understand these consequences in a comprehensive way before moving forward with changes of the scope and materiality contemplated in the proposal. The agencies also have an obligation to consider changes to enhanced risk-based capital rules in the broader context of other existing and contemplated regulatory requirements, which requires a clear understanding of the cumulative impacts and the implications for U.S. economic activity, the structure of the financial system, and financial stability, and whether any reforms are consistent with our requirement to tailor regulation. My hope is that policymakers will take this opportunity to make significant revisions to the proposal to address the concerns raised by the public, and that I will be able to support the next step on Basel capital reforms. Community Reinvestment ActShifting away from capital, last year, the federal bank regulators adopted a new final rule to implement the Community Reinvestment Act. Unfortunately, I was not able to support the final rule. While the final rule included several positive changes from the proposal, those changes ultimately did not outweigh the rule's extensive shortcomings. The final rule is unnecessarily complex, overly prescriptive, and directs outcomes that result in disproportionately greater costs than benefits, adding significantly greater regulatory burden for all banks, but especially for community banks. Even the foundational question—are banks doing enough to support their communities?—is left unanswered in the final rule, perhaps because there is no evidence to support the agencies' assumption that banks are falling short. First and foremost, the final rule applies the same regulatory expectations for small banks as it does for the largest banks. For example, a wide range of community banks—those with more than $2 billion in assets—are treated as "large banks" under the final rule, forcing these banks to comply with the same CRA evaluation standards as a bank with $2 trillion in assets. The sheer lack of recognition that these banks are fundamentally different, with different balance sheets, customers, and business models, misses an important opportunity to appropriately tailor CRA expectations to a bank's size, risk, service area, and business model. This approach is a radical departure within the regulatory framework where no other provision considers a bank with $2 billion in assets as "large." As a result, many community banks will be subject to new and materially enhanced requirements, including a new retail lending test, significantly expanded assessment areas, and increased data and reporting obligations. This intentional blurring of commonly accepted regulatory standards for large banks and community banks is problematic as it will result in increased regulatory expectations for smaller banks and a more one-size-fits-all approach to banking regulation rather than a tailored and calibrated system. The unsupported increases in burden and cost associated with these changes are simply disproportionate when applied to community banks, in a way that will undoubtedly constrain the resources that community banks can devote to supporting their communities. If the final rule's new standards were in place today, based on data from 2018 through 2020, there would be a nearly tenfold increase in banks with a "Needs to Improve" CRA rating. In some ways, this highlights a fallacy underlying these rule changes: that the low number of banks with a "Needs to Improve" rating itself demonstrates that the standards of the CRA regulations have been too lax historically, ignoring the more plausible explanation that banks are committed to supporting their communities. It is unwarranted for the federal banking agencies to materially increase these requirements on banks, resulting in a downgrade of currently satisfactory performance to "Needs to Improve," without a thorough, data-supported analysis that justifies a recalibration evidenced by actual shortcomings in bank activities. Perhaps most concerning about the CRA rule is that it may incentivize banks to reduce their support for certain communities, forcing them to pare back lending in areas where there is a need for credit accessibility. The addition of retail lending assessment areas and outside retail lending areas, coupled with a new requirement for large banks to include an entire county instead of a partial county as an assessment area, may ultimately incentivize firms to pull back lending or even to close branches. I am confident that banks will attempt to make the best of this new rule, and I am certain that they will continue to support their communities regardless of the rule's requirements. But I regret that this new final rule may complicate, and in some instances frustrate, the important goals of the CRA. Regulation II and Debit Card Interchange FeesAlongside the rule changes to the CRA, one of the other most significant proposals this past year would significantly lower the debit card interchange fee cap under Regulation II.3The Dodd-Frank Act mandates that the Federal Reserve establish a cap on debit interchange fees that is reasonable and proportional to the cost incurred by the issuer with respect to debit transactions.4I am concerned about the data underpinning this proposal, and the potential unintended consequences of moving forward with such a change, including the proposal to automatically adjust the cap every two years based on an incomplete formula that may not account for all of the relevant variables. As published, the Board's proposal was based on survey data collected by the Board.5I remain concerned that the analysis underpinning this rulemaking overlooks gaps in the reported data and ignores the broader context—the wide range of business models and sizes of issuers subject to the rule, the potential effect of the rule on bank capital and earnings, the benefits and costs to consumers, and the cumulative effect of regulatory changes, particularly those that affect the pricing and availability to consumers of low-cost or no-cost debit card programs. The data also does not take into account recent revisions to Regulation II, revisions that may have the unintended consequence ofincreasingthe incidence of fraud in bank debit card programs, trends that are not reflected in the data due to the timing of the change, and also would not be taken into account in calibrating the new debit interchange fee cap.6As proposed, the rule would also adopt a "rough justice" approach by establishing a single cap that applies to all issuers, which will leave nearly one third of issuers unable to recover even the subset of costs that are taken into account in calculating the debit interchange fee. On January 22, 2024, the Board announced that the comment period on the proposed revisions to Regulation II has been extended until May 12, 2024, and concurrently published additional data to inform the public about the basis for the proposal.7I look forward to reviewing the comments and hearing feedback from stakeholders on this proposal, specifically as it relates to identifying any issues or concerns with the data that informed the original calibration of the proposal, and any potential gaps in this data or the supporting analysis. I remain concerned about the unintended consequences of this proposal. Without question, an ongoing, permanent decrease in debit card interchange fees will have consequences for banks of all sizes, and more importantly, for their customers that rely on debit card products for payments. Banks may be reluctant to discontinue their retail debit card programs, even with revisions to the interchange fee cap. However, I think it is likely that if this proposal is finalized, banks may need to make some tough decisions about the path forward. Will they need to recover the lost income by imposing higher borrowing costs on bank customers, or where possible increasing other fees? To the extent banks are relying on fee income to support debit card programs, will this be a long-term, sustainable source of revenue if the banking agencies continue to target other fees for elimination? How will this change impact low- and moderate-income (LMI) individuals and families? For example, will banks be forced to discontinue their lowest margin products that target underserved populations, and what will the cost of such changes mean for financial inclusion? How would this change impact the success of financial inclusion efforts encouraged by federal banking agencies, such as Bank On programs? The pain here will likely be felt broadly by banks and their customers, and will continue to trickle down to smaller institutions, including community banks, even if those banks are not directly subject to the interchange fee cap. The consequences for bank debit card programs, and the customers who rely on those programs, may be significant. Bank Mergers and AcquisitionsAnother policy area where I expect to see ongoing federal regulatory attention is in the bank merger application process. Some policymakers and the Department of Justice have strongly signaled an intent to revisit and significantly tighten the existing standards and the related economic analysis used in that process. This ongoing scrutiny of mergers has encouraged a growing public focus on the role of federal banking regulators in reviewing merger applications, and sparked a concern about whether that process is fair, transparent, and consistent with the applicable statutory requirements. This public scrutiny is increasing in light of the growing interest of bank regulators in revisiting standards and processes for approval.8 The past year certainly has not improved the outlook for the bank merger process. While the idiosyncratic features of each bank merger transaction can make it difficult to predict how long the regulatory approval process may take, I remain concerned about delays in average processing times and that subsequent regulatory actions could lead to further delays. The reported data on merger processing timelines may also understate the true timeline for processing, particularly to the extent reported data may not reflect preliminary discussions with regulators, pre-filings with regulators, and may not reflect technical agency "acceptance" of an application—thereby triggering the regulatory processing clock—until well after an application has been received by the agency.9 As all bankers know, application processing delays can be quite harmful, resulting in greater operational risk, increased expenses due in part to contract delays, reputational risk, and staff attrition due to the prolonged uncertainty. In the broader context, reducing the efficiency of bank mergers and acquisitions may also act as a deterrent to a healthy evolution of the banking system. Taken together, reducing merger or acquisition activity could have the consequence of prohibiting transactions that may preserve the presence of banks in rural or underserved areas; transactions that may further prudent growth strategies or that may result in increased competition with larger peers. And yet, there has been little discussion or recognition of how the regulatory process can be enhanced to improve the speed and timeliness of regulatory decision-making on these applications. In my view, the regulators would be well-served by evaluating the merger review process with the goal of promoting efficiency and fairness. Stakeholders who are concerned about the current bank merger review procedures and policies should consider direct engagement with regulators on these issues, including the recently launched mandatory review of regulatory burden under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996.10 Climate ChangeBanks face many well-known, material risks, including credit risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk, cyber risk, and many others. New risks continue to emerge as the banking system, technology, and customer preferences evolve. In the aftermath of the bank failures last spring, both bank management and bank regulators have refocused their efforts related to managing material risks to improve early identification and to facilitate prompt actions to mitigate the buildup of risks. Last October, following on an earlier proposal in 2022, the agencies issued principles for climate-related financial risk management for large institutions.11While climate change is a public policy issue in the U.S. and globally, the unique focus on this particular risk could lead one to believe thatfinancial riskassociated with climate change is a key risk facing the banking industry, or that somehow banks with exposures to these risks have not been appropriately considering climate-related financial risks in managing their material risks. The supporting documents published in connection with the principles do not support this view, however, and raise questions about whether they further the goal of appropriate risk management at regulated institutions. Banks of all sizes have long been expected to manage all material risks associated with their activities. Bankers know that their risks vary based on their business models and loan portfolios, among other things—banks that make loans in drought or flood-prone areas, or tornado-prone areas, or areas that experience wildfires, take those risks into consideration in the underwriting and ongoing monitoring of loans and loan portfolios. Risk management as applied to weather-related financial risks is not new, and this recent approach misses the larger context of how banks manage all material risks. Specifically, the prescription to address this perceived deficiency in risk management, rather than providing clarity and concrete expectations, creates unclear expectations and, as a result, gives examiners almost unlimited supervisory discretion to interpret what expectations are appropriate for regulated institutions. We will need to be vigilant to ensure these expectations are appropriate and proportionate. Under the guidance, banks are expected to monitor and measure climate-related risks over indefinite time horizons—or put another way, engage in expensive, ongoing data collection and speculate about very uncertain effects far into the future—in the context of their lending activities. Banks are also expected to engage in scenario analysis, without a clear roadmap as to what such an analysis should consider. This will likely lead to detrimental impacts on low- and moderate-income communities by increasing the cost of or reducing the availability of credit in those communities. I think we can all agree that examiners should not criticize banks for prudent lending in LMI communities. I am concerned that the net effect of this guidance will be increased costs for banks subject to it, creating further differences between banks and non-bank lenders engaged in the same activities. The effects of this guidance—and follow-on efforts by other regulators—could be material even for banks that are not directly subject to the rules. The principles themselves note that "all financial institutions,regardless of size, may have material exposures to climate-related financial risks…."12Notwithstanding the carveout in the principles for institutions with less than $100 billion in assets, I suspect banks may take little comfort from this nominal carveout in light of the language in the principles, and other government agencies focused on escalating climate risk above many other more material and present-tense risks. For example, the U.S. Treasury has published principles for net-zero financing and investment that focus onindirectgreenhouse gas emissions included in a creditor company's "value chain."13While these principles are described as wholly voluntary, they too could exert significant pressure on banks to reprioritize their risk management function, prioritizing climate change risks that may be immaterial to a bank over more pressing risks. The Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) has also published a report that suggests Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB) must assess risks related to climate and natural disasters "on the FHLBanks' businesses, their members, and the communities they serve."14The vast majority of FHLB member banks fall well below the $100 billion threshold, but now may fall within FHLB's climate assessment requirements, even while being excluded from the scope of their primary regulator's climate guidance. In the context of these many competing directives, banks may be puzzled about supervisory expectations, particularly when a "carveout" in supervisory guidance from a bank's primary banking regulator seems to be at odds with the guidance itself, and with expectations from other government agencies. Banks of all sizes are likely to continue facing regulatory pressure to collect increasing amounts of data. While it is imperative that banks manage all material risks that they face, focusing on climate risk—independent of the many other risks banks must manage in successfully running their businesses—could force banks to reallocate resources to meet unclear and confusing regulatory expectations related to perceived nebulous climate-related financial risks. This approach has the potential to undermine safety and soundness, creating an expensive distraction from more pressing areas of concern. LiquidityFollowing the bank failures last spring, significant attention has been paid to the alleged "lessons learned" creating a path for regulatory reform efforts. This has generated discussion among both policymakers and the public on how to think about liquidity regulation: Should these requirements be expanded to a broader range of institutions? Should the calibration or operation of liquidity requirements like the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) be modified? Should we consider new liquidity requirements, and if so, what form should they take? While these are important policy questions, and are certainly worthy of discussion, it is important to identify exactly what problem we are trying to solve. To those ready to march steadily forward without fully considering the cumulative impacts of change currently being considered, this may seem like a step backwards in the policymaking process. But it is not prudent policymaking to create solutions to solve perceived problems that have not been identified, researched, and supported with evidence and data. We must clearly understand and agree upon the problem before seriously proposing and considering solutions. Answering this question has been complicated by the long shadow of the banking stress last spring, and the hurried and incomplete analyses prepared in the aftermath of those failures. These early efforts—efforts that relied on admittedly incomplete analyses and limited perspective—have generated many policy prescriptions, without fully diagnosing the problem. As a threshold matter, we must recognize that liquidity regulation alone is not a panacea. Liquidity regulation does not result in more focused and nimble supervision. Liquidity regulation alone does not improve the risk management at regulated institutions. Liquidity regulation also has the potential to impose significant costs and limit the lending capacity and business operations of banks, which we must recognize and take into account before imposing any new requirements. But even with these caveats, liquidity regulation should be part of the overall reform discussion. We must think about liquidity broadly, including the sources and uses of liquidity that institutions use today, including the Federal Reserve's Discount Window and its role as lender of last resort, advances from the FHLBs, and other sources that may be available in the market. In this context, we must be honest about the capability and capacity of these resources, and the challenges and limits of these tools. For example, in considering the effective operations of the Fed's Discount Window, recent anecdotes from bankers suggest there is significant room for improving the efficiency of Discount Window operations. We must acknowledge and address such shortcomings if we are truly committed to effective solutions. This requires humility and deference from policymakers, and a willingness to listen to those with a practical understanding of and familiarity with these tools in the context of managing banks. Revisions to the liquidity framework must also be coordinated, to ensure that reform efforts are complementary and can support the banking system's liquidity needs. When considering new liquidity requirements, we must think about not only calibration and scope, but also the unintended consequences of any such requirements, and whether these measures will be effective during stressed conditions. We may not know whether aggregate reforms to the liquidity framework are effective until they are tested under stress, but before that point, we can improve the effectiveness of liquidity reforms by following a serious, methodical approach. Closing ThoughtsAs bankers focused on ensuring your business continues to support your customers and local economy, it may be tempting to distance yourself from this relatively recent wave of regulatory reforms. And frankly, I wouldn't blame you if your initial reaction is to focus on your bank and hope that this regulatory tidal wave passes by. But I urge you to resist that temptation. Policymakers cannot fulfill the responsibility of promoting a safe and sound banking system if we ignore efficiency, tailoring, and appropriate calibration of requirements in the reform agenda. These tenets should be central to the reform process. But to ensure that we appropriately prioritize these goals, policymakers must have the benefit of your engagement and feedback about what is working, what is not, and what are the consequences of regulations that do not support safety and soundness in an efficient and fair way. Your engagement identifies and clarifies the real-world consequences of these far-reaching proposals, enabling us to pursue data-driven reforms, those directed at the most salient risks and issues facing the banking system. Thank you for your engagement, the engagement of your banking associations, and for working to ensure a thriving banking system in the great state of Florida. Thank you, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. SeeMichelle W. Bowman,The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform (PDF), (speech at Protect Main Street, sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C., January 17, 2024).Return to text 3.Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing (PDF), 88 Fed. Reg. 78,100-132 (November 14, 2023).Return to text 4. 15 U.S.C. § 1693o-2.Return to text 5. Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing, 88 Fed. Reg. 78,105-6; Form FR 3064a, FR 3064b.Return to text 6. See dissenting statement, "Statement on Final Amendments to Regulation II to Clarify the Prohibition on Network Exclusivity by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," news release, October 3, 2022.Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board announces it will extend the comment period on its interchange fee proposal until May 12, 2024 and published additional related data," news release, January 22, 2024.Return to text 8. See, e.g., Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Business Combinations Under the Bank Merger Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking," OCC Bulletin 2024-4, January 29, 2024.Return to text 9. See, e.g., Hurry v. FDIC, 589 F. Supp. 3d 100 (D.D.C. 2022).Return to text 10. Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Seek Comment on Interagency Effort to Reduce Regulatory Burden," news release, February 6, 2024.Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies issue principles for climate-related financial risk management for large financial institutions," joint press release, October 24, 2023.Return to text 12. 88 Fed. Reg. 74,183-184 (October 30, 2023).Return to text 13. "Principles for Net-Zero Financing & Investment (PDF)," U.S. Department of the Treasury, September 2023.Return to text 14. "FHLBank System at 100: Focusing on the Future (PDF)," Federal Housing Finance Agency, p. 38.Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At "Macrofinance in the Long Run: New Insights on the Global Economy" 2024 Annual Conference of the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy & Finance at Princeton's School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton, New Jersey Thank you, Gianluca, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.1Let me begin by recognizing the Department of Economics at Princeton for its history of nurturing and supporting scholars in reaching their full potential. Some of the most important, transformative conversations I have had in my career have happened on this campus and with economists making significant contributions to the field. Let me start with the last time I was here. When I was a post doc at Stanford, I emailed Alan Krueger out of the blue and attached an early version of a new paper, asking him if he would meet with me for an hour to discuss it. Because of his experience with large data sets, and his curiosity, thoughtfulness, and generosity, one hour turned into three hours. And he brought along a new assistant professor, Dean Karlan. Not only did I learn a tremendous amount from Alan during that encounter, almost ten years later, I learned even more from him working as a senior economist at the Council of Economic Advisers when Alan was Chair. It is a great legacy of your department that you provided the conditions and support for Alan to make his seminal contributions to economics. I think similar conditions were in place at Princeton to allow Sir Arthur Lewis, the only person of African descent to receive the Nobel Prize in economics, to be productive and thrive. While I never met him, Sir Arthur has been an inspiration throughout my career, and I am grateful for his contribution that was aided by Princeton. The good work done here continues with the subject at hand today. The focus of this conference on macrofinance in the long run provides a good opportunity to reflect on what has changed and what has not changed since the onset of the pandemic four years ago. A feature of the past few years has been heightened uncertainty about how the economy would emerge from the turmoil of the pandemic and the subsequent recovery. I will talk about some types of uncertainty I see as having diminished recently and others that remain elevated. Then I will conclude with a discussion of my views on current monetary policy. When the global pandemic hit in the spring of 2020, economies around the world shut down or sharply limited activity, especially for in-person services. Policymakers took action to support incomes and limit the scarring from those temporary shutdowns. During the post-pandemic recovery in 2021 and 2022, as strong aggregate demand met still-constrained supply, inflation in many economies rose to levels not seen in decades. Uncertainty about the future course of inflation and the supply side of the economy was high, both in the short run and in the longer run. Would supply remain persistently depressed because of scarring from the pandemic? Would inflation become stuck well above the Fed's 2 percent target or even continue to rise? Inflation UncertaintyRecent developments appear to have narrowed the range of uncertainty about the inflation outlook. After rising to more than 7 percent in mid-2022, 12-month inflation in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index fell to 2.6 percent in December. Core PCE inflation (excluding food and energy) fell to 2.9 percent, its first reading below 3 percent since early 2021. Inflation data over the second half of last year were even more favorable, with core PCE inflation averaging less than 2 percent. The disinflationary process has been, and may continue to be, bumpy and uneven, as highlighted by last week's reports on the consumer price index and the producer price index. But a forecast of 12-month PCE inflation converging to our 2 percent target over time still seems reasonable as the baseline outlook. Housing services inflation, which rose sharply in 2021 and 2022, should continue to decline this year as the slowing observed in rent increases on new leases passes into the official statistics. Inflation in core services ex housing (a broad category that includes items such as restaurant meals, car insurance, health care, hotel rooms, and airfares) slowed over the course of last year and should continue to ease over time as consumers increasingly resist price increases and as firms' labor costs grow more slowly.2Finally, with supply chains largely back to normal and goods prices declining over the second half of last year, core goods inflation looks likely to converge to its modestly negative pre-pandemic trend. However, the sharper declines in some goods prices in recent months, such as for used cars, may not be repeated. The behavior of inflation expectations helps underpin my growing confidence that inflation will continue to ease. Long-term inflation expectations remained well anchored during the period of high inflation. For example, consumers' expectations of inflation 5 to 10 years ahead in the University of Michigan survey rose only modestly, staying within the range of the previous 20 years. Moreover, consumers' expectations of inflation one year ahead, which rose sharply with actual inflation, have returned to near their pre-pandemic levels in both the Michigan survey and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Survey of Consumer Expectations. Similarly, an Atlanta Fed survey shows that business expectations of one-year unit cost increases fell to 2.3 percent in February from a high of 3.8 percent in March 2022. Short-Run Supply UncertaintyA strong supply-side recovery has contributed importantly to the recent disinflation. Global supply chains have largely recovered from the bottlenecks experienced in 2021 and 2022, with a return to long-run average levels of indicators such as the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Global Supply Chain Pressure Index. Goods demand has moderated in response to both higher interest rates and a shift in demand away from goods and back toward services. This moderation, coupled with greater supply, partly in response to higher prices, has allowed supply chains to heal. Labor supply also has recovered strongly. A rebound in immigration from the lows reached during the pandemic boosted growth in the working-age population. And labor force participation for workers between 25- and 54-years old rose above its pre-pandemic level. The rise was especially sizable for women in this age range, whose participation rates recently reached all-time highs, perhaps boosted by the increased flexibility associated with working from home. The shift toward at-home work has been especially pronounced for women, 41 percent of whom worked from home on an average workday in 2022, compared with 25 percent in 2017–2018.3It is still an open question whether this shift will be a persistent feature of the post-pandemic economy and whether it can continue to boost women's labor supply. Labor Market Is NormalizingOverall, demand and supply in the labor market appear to have come into better alignment over the past year, after two years of considerable upheaval. A range of indicators suggest continued strength in the labor market but also areas worth monitoring for softening demand. The signs of strength include an unemployment rate of 3.7 percent, up only modestly from the multidecade low reached last year. After slowing through much of the past year, payroll growth rebounded in December and January. Employment growth also broadened in the most recent months after having been concentrated in health care, state and local government, and leisure and hospitality—all of which had been playing catch‑up. Other indicators point to a normalizing labor market. Job openings are well below the levels of a year ago, though they remain above pre-pandemic levels. Hiring has slowed appreciably in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey and other surveys. Quits, which were very elevated in 2021 and 2022, have fallen below pre-pandemic levels. Data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta show that the wage growth differential between job switchers and those staying in their jobs has narrowed. More comprehensive measures of wage growth show gradual cooling. Notably, the employment cost index for the private sector rose 4.1 percent on a 12-month basis in December, down from 5.1 percent over the previous 12 months. At the same time, layoffs and claims for unemployment insurance remain low, implying that all the slowing in labor demand thus far has been along the hiring margin. One area of uncertainty worth watching is whether greater moderation in labor demand could eventually cause firms to react on the layoff margin, which would likely lead to a much more pronounced rise in unemployment than we have seen so far. Economic Resilience and Monetary Policy EffectivenessEconomic activity, especially consumer spending, proved more resilient than expected last year. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew more than 3 percent on a four-quarter basis, with personal consumption expenditures accounting for over half of that growth. Consumer spending generally has continued to show strong momentum in recent months. This broad resilience in the face of the sharp rise in interest rates since spring 2022 raises some questions: Why has growth remained robust in the face of a sharp tightening of monetary policy? Has the relationship between monetary policy and the economy fundamentally changed? To be sure, higher interest rates have reduced demand in some interest-sensitive sectors, such as housing, durable goods, and business investment in equipment and intangible capital. But the effects of those higher rates have been muted by the ability of many homeowners and firms to lock in low interest rates for longer terms before rates rose. Moreover, there has been pent-up demand in some sectors, such as motor vehicles, where supply was previously constrained by shortages of intermediate inputs, including computer chips. Yet over time, these forces supporting demand are waning. New firms and many smaller firms face higher interest rates, as do established firms that need to refinance their debt. Interest rates on auto loans, at about 10 percent for new cars and 14 percent for used cars, are beginning to constrain demand for motor vehicles, while auto production has recovered to pre-pandemic levels as supply bottlenecks have eased. Labor income growth was a significant support for consumer spending last year. Nonetheless, although the employment-to-population ratio, at 60.2, is just below its post-pandemic high, average hours worked have fallen back to normal levels, and wage growth has slowed. Thus, growth in total labor income has slowed to near the pre-pandemic rate of about 5 percent a year, which should contribute to moderating consumption. In addition, consumer spending growth may face increasing headwinds from deteriorating household balance sheets. Savings built up during the pandemic are diminishing, especially for those with low or moderate incomes. Some measures of credit use, such as credit card and buy-now-pay-later use and the share of households carrying a credit card balance, have risen above their pre-pandemic levels. And delinquencies on auto loans and credit cards, which fell to near-record lows during the pandemic, have risen back to near their long-run averages. Thus, although the consumer has been surprisingly resilient, there are reasons to expect some moderation going forward. Long-Run Uncertainty about Supply Chains and DeglobalizationI will now turn to sources of uncertainty about the long run. While the resolution of global supply bottlenecks has played a substantial role over the past year in easing inflation and supporting economic activity, it is likely that the post-pandemic world could be characterized by greater volatility of supply. Russia's war on Ukraine and the ongoing turmoil in the Middle East have highlighted the salience of geopolitical risks to global supply chains. Most recently, threats to shipping in the Red Sea have forced vessels to take longer routes, raising shipping costs and leading to some temporary production stoppages in Europe when key inputs were delayed. While we have not yet seen anything near the widespread supply bottlenecks of 2021 and 2022, there is the potential for these risks to affect supply more than they have so far. Climate change may also pose increasing challenges for global supply chains. For example, low water levels related to drought and high heat have disrupted shipping along key routes such as the Panama Canal and the Rhine River. This combination of geopolitical considerations and a more general desire to strengthen supply chains that appeared fragile during the pandemic have led to discussions of deglobalization (reduced international trade), reshoring (bringing production home), or "friendshoring" (which would reorient trade around blocs of friendly countries). Such a reduction and reorienting of trade could reverse some of the persistent decline in goods prices that was seen over the two decades preceding the pandemic.4 Some shifts in trade patterns are already apparent. At the aggregate level, the share of trade in global GDP has flattened in recent years, following a sustained increase. And there has been a dramatic reallocation in U.S.–China trade following the tariffs imposed by the two countries beginning in 2018. To gain a greater understanding of the potential effects of deglobalization, it is often useful to conduct analysis using more granular data, rather than just looking at the economy in the aggregate. Use of product-country-level data on trade flows, for example, has highlighted implications of the U.S. shift away from Chinese imports in recent years, including the potential for higher import prices.5Moreover, firm-level data have been used to examine how factors like supply chain shocks and trade policy uncertainty affect the resilience of long-term relationships between importers and exporters.6Substantial additional work will be needed to understand the implications of any move toward deglobalization for the U.S. economy. Long-Run Uncertainty about ProductivityAnother long-run uncertainty concerns productivity growth and whether the strong performance in recent quarters will persist. Productivity growth is a key factor in the health of the overall economy and in our daily lives. Ultimately, it is the single most important determinant of improvements in living standards. If productivity growth remains strong, a faster pace of economic growth need not be inflationary. Productivity is usually volatile and has been especially so since the pandemic. Nonetheless, an important part of the strong supply response last year was labor productivity growth at a robust 2.7 percent. Various possible explanations for the recent strong productivity performance are the following: Will the recent productivity surge continue? The rise in new businesses since the pandemic may increase innovation over time.8For instance, Klenow and Li (2020) find that new and young firms account for half of all productivity growth despite accounting for only one-fifth of workers.9 Looking ahead, I see artificial intelligence (AI) as a potentially significant source of productivity growth, but that will take time. History shows that the journey from invention of general-purpose technologies to innovation to productivity can be long and uneven. Although adoption of generative AI is happening at a rapid clip, the full benefit of a technology requires complementary investments as well as changes in corporate structure, management practices, and worker training. Monetary PolicyIn the long run, productivity growth benefits from both sides of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. Price stability reduces uncertainty. And a strong labor market creates incentives for investment in productive capital and human resources. Given the disinflation and labor market normalization I have described, I believe the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance after being weighted toward excessive inflation. When considering appropriate monetary policy, I now see two-sided risks. I am now weighing the possibility of easing policy too soon and letting inflation stay persistently high versus easing policy too late and causing unnecessary harm to the economy. I intend to closely monitor incoming data to determine whether the disinflation process is continuing and to observe the effects on the economy of the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) previous policy tightening. I believe our current monetary policy stance is restrictive, putting significant downward pressure on aggregate demand. The question we face is: How do we calibrate policy to balance the two-sided risks? I would like to have greater confidence that inflation is converging to 2 percent before beginning to cut the policy rate. I would see an eventual rate cut as adjusting policy to reflect a shifting balance of risks. When the FOMC raised the policy rate to its current level last July, the risk of inflation remaining above 3 percent for some time was quite salient. Since then, inflation has fallen more quickly than anticipated, and the risk of persistently high inflation, though it has not disappeared, appears to have diminished. At some point, as we gain greater confidence that disinflation is ongoing and sustainable, that changing outlook will warrant a change in the policy rate. Restrictive monetary policy and favorable supply developments this past year have put us in a good position to achieve both sides of the FOMC's mandate. We should continue to move carefully as we receive more data, maintaining the degree of policy restriction needed to sustainably restore price stability while keeping the economy on a good path. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The number of mentions of "price sensitive" or "price sensitivity" recently have increased significantly in the Federal Reserve's Beige Book, which gathers anecdotal information on current economic conditions across Federal Reserve Districts.Return to text 3. See the American Time Use Survey, available on the Bureau of Labor Statistics website athttps://www.bls.gov/tus.Return to text 4. See Christine Lagarde (2023), "Central Banks in a Fragmenting World," speech delivered at the Council on Foreign Relations' C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, New York, April 17; and Colin Hottman and Ricardo Reyes-Heroles (2023), "Globalization, Inflation Dynamics, and the Slope of the Phillips Curve (PDF)," paper presented at the 2023 BFI International Macro-Finance Conference, sponsored by the Becker Friedman Institute for Economics, University of Chicago, December 1.Return to text 5. See Laura Alfaro and Davin Chor (2023), "Global Supply Chains: The Looming 'Great Reallocation' (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 31661 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September).Return to text 6. See Pinelopi Goldberg and Tristan Reed (2023), "Is the Global Economy Deglobalizing? And If So, Why? And What Is Next? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 30–31; and Sebastian Heise, Justin R. Pierce, Georg Schaur, and Peter K. Schott (2024), "Tariff Rate Uncertainty and the Structure of Supply Chains (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 32138 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February).Return to text 7. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023), "The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised November 2023).Return to text 8. See Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2023), "Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: Causes and Consequences?" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 28–29.Return to text 9. See Peter J. Klenow and Huiyu Li (2020), "Innovative Growth Accounting," in Martin Eichenbaum and Erik Hurst, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 245–95.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Annual Columbia Law School Banking Conference, New York, New York Thank you to Columbia University and the organizers for the opportunity to speak today.1It has been nearly a year since the sudden failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and ensuing turmoil in the banking system, events which prompted important questions about how banks manage risks and how we at the Federal Reserve supervise that risk-taking. It is a fitting time to share some reflections on the importance of the day-to-day work of bank supervision and the steps we are taking to improve the speed, force, and agility of supervision. Review of Silicon Valley BankLet me begin by summarizing my review of the failure of Silicon Valley Bank. This was the first major bank failure since the Global Financial Crisis, and it necessitated a deep, unflinching review of what went wrong. So, following the failure, Chair Powell and I determined that it would be appropriate for me to lead a review on the conditions that led to SVB's failure. Experienced and well-respected staff from around the Federal Reserve System who were not involved in SVB's supervision conducted the review. The review found that, first and foremost, the bank's management failed to manage the bank's risks, and its board failed to oversee management.2But the review also found that Federal Reserve supervisors did not identify issues quickly enough, and when we did identify risks, we were too slow to act with sufficient force to change management behavior. The SVB report identified the need to improve the speed, force, and agility of supervision to align with the risks, size, and complexity of supervised banks. To do this, the report identified several areas of focus, including intensifying supervision at the right pace, encouraging timely supervisory action and escalation, and improving agility of supervision. We are taking many steps to strengthen supervision, some of which have immediate influence on our work and some which will bear fruit over the long term. The Goal of SupervisionLet me start by explaining the goals and benefits of supervision. The mission of bank supervision is to promote a safe, sound, and efficient banking system to support a strong economy.3As I have spoken about many times before, banks play a critical role in the economy by providing deposit products, credit, and other financial services to individuals and businesses. The nature of banking—and the interconnectedness of the system—pose vulnerabilities to individual banks and to the banking system. Deposit insurance and other forms of governmental support help to protect depositors, banks, and the broader economy, but also add to moral hazard, in that banks do not internalize the full costs of their risks. Regulation and supervision help to make it more likely that banks manage their risks prudently given the costs that their failure can pose on society, and that banks have the capacity to support the economy through good times and bad. Through regulation, the Federal Reserve Board sets the minimum requirements for banks.4These regulations require banks to have systems to manage their risks, and to maintain capital and liquidity in light of those risks. Regulations are tiered depending on bank risks, with the larger, more complex banks subject to more stringent requirements. We need to get regulation right, so that the baseline level of resilience in the system is strong enough. The requirements set in regulation, however, may not be sufficient for banks with activities or profiles that are different from or are riskier than a typical bank. Supervision helps to fill in these gaps. Supervisors do not manage banks. Instead, a supervisor's job is to evaluate a bank's material risks in light of its operations, and to help make sure that the bank has sufficient governance and controls, capital, and liquidity to operate their firm, both in normal times, and in stressful ones. Supervisors focus on the unique risks of the bank and also bring perspectives of risk across similar firms in the banking system. These two complementary perspectives help supervisors to identify and prioritize key areas of risk and to focus management's attention on addressing the most important issues. The goal of supervision is not to prevent all bank failures. In a market economy, poorly run firms should go out of business. Similarly, the goal of supervision is not to tell a bank that its business model may not work; the market will do that. The goal is to help bank managers and boards focus their attention on weaknesses in their risk measurement and management practices, compliance with law, and the sufficiency of the bank's capital and liquidity resources given its risk profile. Proactive supervisory action helps firms address issues before they grow so large as to threaten the bank, and earlier intervention means that firms may have more options to fix their problems. Supervision can also help to mitigate systemic risk. A bank's failure can lead to broader instability in the banking system by imposing direct credit losses on other banks, and if the failing bank is forced to sell assets in a fire sale, depressing prices and leading to additional losses at banks holding those same types of assets. Bank risks can cascade through the financial system because of these types of interconnectedness. Contagion from a failing bank can also happen when it is not clear to market participants and depositors whether other banks have similar risks that have not yet fully come to light. Inadequate capital, insufficient liquidity, weak risk management practices, and even cybersecurity failures can not only harm individual banks, but also threaten the stability of the system as a whole. Through supervision, we attempt to focus the most attention and apply heightened standards to firms with the greatest potential to pose systemic risk. But knowing in advance which firms may pose systemic risk is not an exact science. The Benefits of SupervisionThere is strong evidence that supervision has significant benefits for individual banks, as well as the entire banking system. Economic research on supervision's impact shows that more intensively supervised banks are safer and no less profitable than their peers.5Supervisory enforcement actions have been shown to result in reduced risk through decreased leverage and safer loan portfolios.6Of course, there are costs of supervision on a bank, and supervision is most effective when its intensity is proportionate to the risks the bank poses to the financial system. More broadly, more intensively supervised banks have less volatile income and lower loan losses, especially during periods of stress, precisely when the risk of contagion is heightened.7Since weakness in the banking system can amplify economic downturns, actions that promote stronger banks during such times bring benefits that extend well beyond individual banks and the banking system. American households and businesses depend on banks, and on bank supervisors, to help to ensure banks are operating safely and soundly. Taken up a level, a systemwide perspective—often referred to a "macroprudential perspective"—is critical for understanding risks to financial stability and thus to the banking system's ability to provide critical lending, payments, and intermediation services to consumers and businesses. It is an important complement to the "microprudential" supervision of individual banks. Speed, Force, and Agility of SupervisionSince SVB's failure, we have focused on improving the speed, force, and agility of supervision, as appropriate to the situation. This means that supervisors take timely action as risks build up; that supervisors deploy supervisory tools and escalation effectively; and that supervisors are able to take account of changes in market, economic, and financial conditions, both to reprioritize examination activity as well as to draw supervisory conclusions based on new and different patterns of risks. In all cases, supervisory action must be appropriate to the situation. Because supervision is often uniquely specific to an individual institution, the necessary response should depend on the nature and extent of the risk, size and complexity of the institution; its role in the financial system; and the potential for fire sales, cascades, or contagion. And of course, our findings must be grounded in fact, credible, and consistent with the law. Supervision should also strive to be efficient in the sense of getting the desired supervisory intensity at the lowest cost to supervisors and banks, to the extent practicable and consistent with the overarching objectives of a resilient banking system. The past year has been busy for Federal Reserve supervisors. The banking system is sound and resilient, and supervisors have been on the frontlines to help ensure it remains that way. Supervisors have brought their understanding of individual banks' operations and strategy and an understanding of local conditions to assess bank risk. We also have focused on the macro-prudential, systemic perspectives, to form an understanding of the condition of the banking system broadly. And supervisors have worked closely with banks to improve the resilience of banks so that they can effectively serve their customers and provide credit to the economy. Let me now walk through our efforts over the past year. Intensifying Supervision at the Right PaceAs noted in the SVB report, supervision should intensify at the right pace as a bank grows in size and complexity. Much of the build-up of risk at SVB occurred while the firm was supervised within the regional bank program, which covered firms with assets between $10 billion and $100 billion.8Based on this experience, for large and more complex regional banking organizations, including firms that are growing rapidly, we are assessing such a firm's condition, strategy, and risk management more frequently, and deepening our supervisory interactions the firm. At the same time, smaller and less complex firms will see little difference from the current state. In addition, we have been working to introduce more coordination between the regional bank and large bank supervisory programs. As a regional bank grows in size and complexity, the firm's management should be investing in the firm's ability to manage its risk, so that the firm's capabilities are growing commensurately with the firm's risk. If this happens, application of standards for larger banks should not require significant changes in a firm's risk management capabilities because the bank should have been making these investments along the way. So for regional banks that are approaching the $100 billion threshold, we are working to improve coordination between supervisory teams and to share the range of practices at large banking organizations just over the $100 billion threshold. The goal is that the transition to heightened supervision for fast-growing banks is more of a gradual slope and not a cliff. For large banking organizations, we are planning to conduct more horizontal, or cross-firm supervisory examinations, to put our assessment of an individual bank in context and improve the consistency in how we look across banks. Timely Supervisory Action and EscalationAs noted in the SVB report, once issues are identified, they should be addressed more quickly, both by banks and supervisors. Over the past year, supervisors have taken many steps to better ensure that banks are appropriately managing their risks, including interest rate risk and liquidity risk, and are prepared were they to experience stress.9 SVB failed in part because of its mismanagement of interest rate and liquidity risks. While SVB was an outlier in many ways, its failure focused attention on other banks in the system with large unrealized losses and high concentrations of uninsured deposits. Examiners have been conducting additional targeted examinations for firms with large unrealized losses or other vulnerabilities. During these exams, we engage extensively with the banks to understand the firm's financial and operational health. And we work closely with our state regulatory partners; they provide important insights into the banks and the banking environment, and we value their continued partnership. Where there are weaknesses in how firms are managing these risks, examiners are requiring firms to take steps to address these weaknesses and encouraging them to bolster their capital position, reduce their liquidity risk, or mitigate their interest rate risk, as appropriate. For a small number of banks with a risk profile that could result in funding pressures for the firm, supervisors are continuously monitoring these firms. Let me turn to supervision of a specific risk: commercial real estate (CRE). The reduced demand for office space and higher interest rates have put pressure on some CRE valuations, particularly in the office sector. Supervisors have been closely focused on banks' CRE lending in several ways: how banks are measuring their risk and monitoring the risk, what steps they have taken to mitigate the risk of losses on CRE loans, how they are reporting their risk to their directors and senior management, and whether they are provisioning appropriately and have sufficient capital to buffer against potential future CRE loan losses. Stepping back, because of the heightened risk environment and heightened supervisory attention, the Federal Reserve has issued more supervisory findings and downgraded firms' supervisory ratings at a higher rate in the past year. In addition, we have increased our issuance of enforcement actions. These actions do not represent a change in policy; they reflect the impact of the changing economic, interest rate, and financial environment on a bank's financial resources. We want and expect supervisors to help banks focus adequate attention on the areas that matter most for the particular bank, whether that is interest rate risk, CRE, or cybersecurity vulnerabilities, to name a few. As noted in the SVB report, we continue to evaluate whether we should temporarily require additional capital or liquidity beyond regulatory requirements where the firm has trouble in managing its risks. Higher capital or liquidity requirements can serve as an important safeguard until risk controls improve, and they can focus management's attention on the most critical issues. Other supervisors use these types of tools, and we can draw from these experiences as we consider what may be appropriate for our supervised banks.10 Improving the Agility of SupervisionAnother area of focus has been to improve the agility of supervision. Supervisors must be able to make judgments on a forward-looking basis built on imperfect information, while remaining fair, evidence-based, and consistent. In the case of SVB, supervisors delayed action to gather more evidence even as weaknesses were growing. This delay meant SVB's problems persisted past the time when it had options to address them, and those problems got worse. Drawing from this experience, we have been looking to enhance our supervisory programs so that we correctly balance a strong process with the need to act based on imperfect information, and tools that speed up and strengthen the consequences for supervisory findings. As I mentioned previously, supervisors do not manage firms; they communicate to firms where there are weaknesses in firm practices and escalate those concerns where appropriate. So here, supervisors should be issuing supervisory findings in a timely way, focusing on the important issues, aligning findings with the severity of the issue, and communicating findings to firms clearly. Once supervisory findings are communicated, supervisors should appropriately assess supervised institutions' remediation of findings, and when the firm fails to adequately address issues, escalate findings in a timely way to more stringent actions. As part of this effort, we are working on our enforcement processes to provide consistency and the appropriate speed, force, and agility in the recommendation, development, and escalation of enforcement actions. In addition, we are working to improve our processes for identifying potential developments or trends in risk that could negatively affect individual banking firms or the banking system, and better connecting this analysis to supervision. Where risks are emerging, this analysis may help to bolster the basis for forward-looking supervisory assessments. Where risks are underappreciated, the analysis may help to challenge supervisors' assessments and foster meaningful action. It is also critical that we look beyond the risks we see today to keep the banking system strong and resilient into the future. Supervisors should be encouraged to consider a range of potential shocks and vulnerabilities, so that they think through the implications of unlikely "tail" events with severe consequences. Most people are skilled at pattern detection, but often have trouble contemplating the consequences of events outside of our historical experience. It is important to find ways to break these strictures and think more critically about scenarios that could lead to acute distress at firms. This requires us to have the right tools, expertise, and supervisory approaches for a given firm and environment. ConclusionThe Federal Reserve's bank supervisory function is integral to a safe and sound banking system. And just as the banking system changes, the Fed's supervision must change and adapt with it. We need to continuously explore new models of financial risk. We should bring together multiple perspectives to challenge supervisory judgments and build organizational frameworks that institutionalize this practice. And we must appropriately adjust supervision when we see changes at a firm or in the financial sector, especially in these times of great innovation and technological change. But we also must be humble about our challenges; the failure of Silicon Valley Bank one year ago revealed our own failures. It showed that in some cases, such as when banks grow rapidly or take on new risks, that supervision can lack the speed, force and agility required to keep up with those changes. Since that time, we have been hard at work to address those issues. And while this work will take time, I am committed to getting the job done properly. Supervisors around the Federal Reserve System have stepped up to the challenge, and I am grateful for their continued good work. Thank you, and I'm happy to answer questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April 2023).Return to text 3. For more on bank supervision, please see the Federal Reserve's website at:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/understanding-federal-reserve-supervision.htmReturn to text 4. In this speech, references to "banks" includes banks, as well as their holding companies. Bank holding companies constitute the largest segment of institutions supervised by the Federal Reserve, but the Federal Reserve also supervises state member banks, savings and loan holding companies, foreign banks operating in the United States, and other entities. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) also supervise national banks and state nonmember banks, respectively. State banking agencies also supervise state-chartered banks.Return to text 5. Beverly Hirtle and Anna Kovner, "Bank Supervision,"Annual Review of Financial Economics14 (2022): 39–56.Return to text 6. Allen N. Berger, Jin Cai, Raluca A. Roman, and John Sedunov, "Supervisory Enforcement Actions Against Banks and Systemic Risk,"Journal of Banking and Finance140 (July 2022).Return to text 7. Beverly Hirtle, Anna Kovner, and Matt Plosser, "The Impact of Supervision on Bank Performance,"Journal of Finance75, no. 5 (2020): 2,765–2,808.Return to text 8. Prior to SVB's collapse, firms with assets of less than $100 billion were supervised using approaches developed for community banking organizations, and supervisory engagement with the firm was limited to an annual examination and targeted examinations as needed.Return to text 9. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF), (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2023); and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2023).Return to text 10. Regulators in Europe and the UK impose additional capital and liquidity buffer requirements on firms through their Pillar 2 framework. In addition, the OCC's framework enables the OCC to impose higher individual minimum capital requirements (IMCRs) via an enforcement action. See 12 C.F.R. 3.403.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Uneven Outcomes in the Labor Market Conference, Washington, D.C. (via pre-recorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Mandate for Maximum EmploymentGood afternoon and welcome to the third day of the Federal Reserve's Uneven Outcomes in the Labor Market Conference.1It is a pleasure to join so many researchers, policymakers, and practitioners interested in understanding the labor market and its implications for the overall economy and the financial well-being of workers. At the Federal Reserve, the labor market is often top of mind. As many of you are aware, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has a mandate to effectively promote maximum employment and price stability. My FOMC colleagues and I strive to find the balance between these objectives, and when considering how best to promote a healthy economy, it is important that the Fed supports a labor market that works for both employees and employers. Today, I'd like to highlight the role of small businesses and entrepreneurship in the U.S. labor market and, in turn, the importance of access to capital in creating and maintaining jobs in those businesses. I'm sure many of us know business owners who put their own personal savings—even their homes—at risk to start or to grow their businesses. I will discuss whyexternalsources of capital and financial institutions that provide access to capital are vital for both successful small businesses and a robust labor market. There are many pathways for workers to find employment. For some, entrepreneurship offers the opportunity to fulfill a personal goal to create a new business or to have more control over their careers. While not all start-ups are successful, many grow into stable businesses that employ additional workers. In fact, small businesses currently employ nearly half of America's private sector workers and have accounted for over 60 percent of net new jobs since 1995.2 Throughout my experience as a banker, bank commissioner, and Federal Reserve Governor, I have been inspired by the success stories shared by entrepreneurs from across the country. At the same time, I've also heard about many of the difficulties they face, particularly in hiring and retaining employees, and sourcing capital for business operations. For example, a bakery owner in Texas recently shared the challenges her business has faced in hiring and retaining workers. Another small business owner in Maryland shared the difficulties he has faced in accessing capital to open new restaurant locations. While these are just two examples that I have heard personally, I know that it can be very difficult for many small businesses to find qualified workers and access the capital they need to grow. As policymakers consider making changes to existing rules and expectations that may impact a business's access to funding sources, we need to identify and understand any potential unintended consequences of these new policies, especially if those policies may affect the ability of small businesses and entrepreneurs to access capital. Recent Trends in Small BusinessWhile many of these challenges are typical hurdles for entrepreneurs and start-ups, the pandemic created new complications for businesses, small and large. Firms owned by women and minorities were particularly vulnerable due to many being newer businesses, more fragile financially, and more likely to be part of the sectors hit hardest by the pandemic, including food services, personal services, and retail.3 Yet, while many small businesses shut their doors due to the effects of the pandemic, in 2020, the United States saw a boom in business creation, which began shortly after the initial lockdown period. This increase has continued long after the labor market recovery. In fact, the Census Bureau's November 2023 analysis of business applications shows that business formation since 2021 has remained 32 percent higher than in the previous ten years.4Many of these new businesses were started by minority business owners.5Increased rates of workers voluntarily quitting their jobs and high levels of unemployment during the pandemic appear to have encouraged some workers to become self-employed or become entrepreneurs. This growth in start-up businesses could help to address the challenge of closing employment gaps for workers who typically face the greatest headwinds in the labor market. For example, start-ups are more likely to hire new workers and workers with lower levels of educational attainment.6New businesses have also been responsible for a surprising amount of job growth, with an average of nearly one million jobs created each quarter from early 2021 through the beginning of 2023, which is a significantly higher pace than was typical prior to the pandemic.7 Fed Support for Access to Capital for Small BusinessesOf course, in order to create jobs, small businesses need access to sufficient amounts of affordable credit and capital to form, grow, and succeed. Otherwise, they may underperform, not reaching their growth potential either in revenue or employment. The share of small businesses reporting that they rely on personal sources for capital increased from about half in 2019 to two-thirds in 2022, according to the Fed's Small Business Credit Survey (or SBCS) from that year.8This suggests a high degree of personal risk for owners and their workers. Moreover, personal financial resources are often limited, which can constrain growth. Ideally, small businesses should be able to access external funding, which can be a key to their growth and stability. Most businesses that seek external financing turn to banks—community banks and larger institutions. Community banks remain an essential resource for many small businesses to access capital to support their businesses. These banks are focused on relationship banking, which uniquely positions them to meet the challenge of assessing the creditworthiness of local, small businesses. Community banks make greater investments in small business lending relative to larger banks.9Furthermore, according to the 2022 Small Business Credit Survey, small businesses were more likely to be satisfied with their experiences dealing with small bank lenders than with large bank lenders or finance companies.10 I'd like to take a moment to share some of the ways the Fed supports small businesses through community banks. First, the Fed engages community banks through its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC), which advises the Board on matters of public policy. CDIAC members include community bankers who provide insight and information about the economy, lending conditions, and other issues that they see firsthand in their communities. Second, the Federal Reserve supervises and regulates smaller banks based on a variety of factors specific to their size, condition, risk profile, and business model to assess their safety and soundness. One of the Federal Reserve's unique strengths is the localized nature of our supervision, which relies on regional Reserve Banks that understand their local markets and community needs. Many community banks also have a mission to serve historically underserved populations. These include Minority Depository Institutions (MDIs), Women-Owned Depository Institutions (WDIs), and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs). These banks are vital sources of capital to many underrepresented small businesses. For example, the Philadelphia Fed found that community banks, including these unique banks, are traditionally more successful than larger institutions at small business lending in times of crisis. This finding was well supported by volume of lending conducted by these banks through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) during the COVID-19 pandemic.11 The PPP provided loans to small businesses to keep their workers employed. The program was implemented in large part through community banks, including MDIs, WDIs and CDFIs. The Fed supported the PPP by providing liquidity through its emergency lending program, the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility.12Notably, MDIs originated more than 20,000 PPP loans to support small businesses during that time.13 The Federal Reserve has also supported CDFIs and MDIs through their work with the U.S. Treasury Department on the implementation of the Emergency Capital Investment Program (ECIP). This COVID-relief program provided $9 billion in capital directly to CDFIs and MDIs. These funds were to be used for loans, grants, and forbearance to small and minority-owned businesses, especially in low-income and underserved communities.14 I'd like to close with a brief note on the CDFI Fund's recently released revisions to the CDFI Certification Application. In addition to ECIP funding, certified CDFIs are eligible to access other federal resources, state and local governmental funds, philanthropic support, and private sector investment. I look forward to engaging with community banks as they and other financial institutions begin to digest these revised application requirements. I also look forward to learning about how these changes may affect the certification process for renewing or obtaining a CDFI certification. ConclusionThe Fed continues to support the growth of start-ups and small businesses as a means of creating opportunity for all workers. This afternoon's discussion will focus on how employer structure and financing may affect employee wages and benefits. I am excited to see that new research will be presented at this event, and I look forward to our ongoing discussions about labor outcomes. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. "Frequently Asked Questions (PDF)," U.S. Small Business Administration, March 2023.Return to text 3. August Benzow and Nora Esposito, "Minority- and Women-Owned Businesses Tend to be Younger, Making them More Vulnerable in the Coming Recession," Economic Innovation Group, August 2020.Return to text 4. U.S. Census Bureau data accessed in Federal Reserve Economic Data.Return to text 5. Current Population Survey conducted by the US Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Return to text 6. "2023 Report on Employer Firms: Findings from the 2022 Small Business Credit Survey," Small Business Credit Survey, Federal Reserve Banks, March 8, 2023.Return to text 7. Bureau of Labor Statistics data on jobs created by new establishments averaged 976,000 per quarter from 2020:Q3 to 2023:Q1, compared with 810,000 per quarter from 2009 to 2019.Return to text 8.From the 2023 SBCS Report on Employer Firms, 56 percent of small businesses relied on personal sources for capital in the 2019 SBCS compared to 66 percent in the 2022 SBSC.Return to text 9.A Fed analysis of June 2023 call report data shows that community banks have larger shares of small-business loans relative to their total assets than larger institutions. See Eldar Beiseitov, "Small Banks, Big Impact: Community Banks and Their Role in Small Business Lending," October 20, 2023.Return to text 10. 2023 SBCS Report on Employer Firms.Return to text 11. Allen N. Berger, Maryann P. Feldman, W. Scott Langford, and Raluca A. Roman, "'Let Us Put Our Moneys Together': Minority-Owned Banks and Resilience to Crises (PDF)" (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, June 2023).Return to text 12. See the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ppplf.htm.Return to text 13. Anthony Barr and Mac McComas, "Minority Depository Institutions: State of Knowledge, Sector Summary & Lending Activity, and Impact, 2010-2020 (PDF)" (paper presented at the National Bankers Association Foundation and Johns Hopkins 21st Century Cities Initiative, May 2023). Separately, the Fed supports MDIs through the Fed's Partnership for Progress (PFP) program, which provides technical assistance on regulatory matters, conducts research, hosts convenings, and provides examiner training to support and promote the stability of MDIs.Return to text 14. U.S. Department of the Treasury, "Biden-Harris Administration Announces Over $8.28 Billion in Investments in Community Development Financial Institutions and Minority Depository Institutions through the Emergency Capital Investment Program (PDF)," press release, September 22, 2022.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At "Climate, Currency, and Central Banking," a conference sponsored by the Global Interdependence Center and the University of the Bahamas, Nassau, Bahamas Thank you to the Global Interdependence Center for the invitation to speak to you today.1My subject is the U.S. dollar's primacy in global finance and the global economy, which some feel is under threat as never before. One headline asserts: "Why the Dollar's Reign Is Near an End." Actually, it turns out this threat isn't so new. That headline was from 2011.2It is tempting to write off concerns about the dollar's status that never seem to come to pass, but I don't dismiss them. The role of the United States in the world economy is changing, finance is always changing, and I think it is important for policymakers to regularly consider if and why the dollar's role might change as well. That's what I aim to do in these remarks. When people refer to the dollar and its reserve currency status, they typically mix together a variety of roles that it plays on the world stage. So I would like to start by clarifying these many roles. First, the term "dollar" often refers to physical U.S. currency and its use around the world. However, in certain contexts, it is used to describe financial assets, such as U.S. Treasury securities, that are denominated in and promise redemption in U.S. dollars. Finally, the word "dollar" is used to describe its use as the settlement unit of account in international transactions. I will use the word "dollar" throughout this speech to refer to these various concepts, and I hope it will be clear which one I am referring to as I speak. For many decades, the U.S. dollar has had an outsized role in the global economy, supported by the size and strength of the U.S. economy, its stability and openness to trade and capital flows, and strong property rights and rule of law. The dollar's international role has clear benefits for the United States, lowering transaction and borrowing costs for U.S. households, businesses, and government and widening the pool of creditors and investors. The widespread use of the dollar can help insulate the U.S. economy from shocks from abroad. The rest of the world also benefits from the dollar's international role. The dollar serves as a safe, stable, and dependable form of money around the world. It serves as a reliable common denominator for global trade and a dependable settlement instrument for cross-border payments. In doing so, it reduces costs of engaging in international transactions for households and businesses including those outside of the United States. Recent commentary warning of a possible decline in the status of the U.S. dollar raises concerns about the effects of sanctions against Russia, U.S. political dysfunction, the rise of digital assets, and China's efforts to bolster usage of the renminbi. Other commentary has warned of "geoeconomic fragmentation" and whether trade and financial flows could realign in ways that adversely affect the dollar's outsized role. Against this backdrop, it's useful to review whether there has been any change in how the dollar stacks up against the standard measures by which we assess a currency's acceptance as an international currency. Acceptance as an "international currency" is typically assessed along three dimensions: its use as a store of value, as a medium of exchange, and as a unit of account. Alarmist headlines notwithstanding, the dollar continues to dominate in all three of these measures, and generally by a large margin compared with any other currency.3 The "store of value" dimension relates to the ability to save in a given currency and retrieve those savings in the future without a significant expected loss of purchasing power. A key measure of the confidence in a currency as a store of value is its use in official foreign exchange reserves. At almost 60 percent of global reserves in 2022, the U.S. dollar is by far the dominant reserve currency.4The next leading competitor to the dollar is the euro, with a share of roughly 20 percent. Although some have pointed to a decreasing share of reserves held in dollars, the dollar share—though down somewhat from the mid-2000s—is actually little changed from the mid-1990s. And while there has been an increase in the share held in renminbi, that share is trivial at about 2 percent. To the extent that there has been gradual diversification in reserves since the mid-2000s, it has been into a wide range of other currencies, such as Canadian and Australian dollars. The majority of global dollar reserves are held in U.S. Treasury securities, with the depth and liquidity of the U.S. Treasury market reinforcing the desirability of the dollar as a store of value. Currently, foreign investors hold about one-third of Treasury securities outstanding. There has been a steady decline in this share: Foreign investors held roughly half of Treasury securities outstanding 10 years ago. A major reason for the decline, however, is that over the past decade, the stock of global foreign exchange reserves has grown much more slowly than the stock of Treasury securities outstanding, so foreign official investors are accounting for a declining share. Foreign private investor demand for U.S. Treasury securities, by contrast, has been sustained and has kept pace with the increased issuance in recent years. The roughly one-third of Treasury securities currently held by all foreign investors is now broadly comparable with shares of sovereign debt held by foreign investors in the euro area, the U.K., and Japan.5The U.S. benefits from foreign demand for U.S. Treasury securities since it bids up the price of such securities, thereby lowering the interest expense paid on Treasury debt. Another way to look at the dollar as a store of value for the global financial system is the demand for U.S. dollar banknotes abroad. Determining exactly how much currency is held abroad is challenging, but research suggests that foreign investors hold roughly half of the dollar value of U.S. banknotes outstanding.6This share is similar to or a bit higher than for euro banknotes, where recent research estimates suggest that between 30 and 50 percent of euro banknotes are held abroad, primarily in countries that are geographically close to the euro area.7"Dollarization" or "partial dollarization" is a global phenomenon that refers to the use of dollars in foreign countries as a substitute for the domestic currency. Typically, this practice occurs because of persistently high domestic inflation. While foreign citizens are free to use any other currency issued around the world, the dollar is the overwhelming choice for citizens in these countries. Fulfilling foreign demand for U.S. currency allows us to earn seigniorage on banknotes held abroad. So, by store-of-value measures, the dollar remains the most widely used currency, though its dominance may have edged down slightly over the past couple decades. The dollar's attractiveness to private investors and businesses is especially apparent in its role as a medium of exchange—that is, in its use in trade invoicing, global banking, international debt issuance, and foreign exchange transactions. To start with trade invoicing, the dollar is by far the dominant currency. Trade invoicing in dollars means that the terms of the contract are specified in units of the dollar and the dollar is the settlement object for the trade. Dollar invoicing accounts for at least three-fourths of export invoicing in all regions, except in Europe, and over 96 percent in the Americas. Not surprisingly, the euro is the dominant invoicing currency in Europe, but even there, the euro share is only about 50 percent once intra-euro-area trade is excluded.8Dollar dominance on this dimension has major benefits for U.S. firms, as it removes exchange rate risk and eliminates the need for complicated and costly hedging strategies when they engage in international trade. Invoicing dominance is linked to a similarly dominant role in international banking and debt issuance. About 60 percent of international banking loans and deposits are denominated in U.S. dollars. For international debt securities, about 70 percent of bonds issued in a currency other than the issuer's home country currency are denominated in U.S. dollars.9These shares have been quite stable over the past 10 to 15 years. Dollar dominance in international banking has benefits for U.S. households and businesses, since it means that foreign banks have strong connections to the U.S. financial system, increasing the amount of credit available in the U.S. and lowering the cost of borrowing. For debt securities, dollar dominance means that when U.S. firms issue debt in markets outside the United States, they can issue in dollars and don't have to bear exchange rate risk. And U.S. investors can get exposure to foreign firms without incurring exchange rate risk. The many sources of demand for U.S. dollars show through to its very high share of foreign exchange transactions, where, according to the latest statistics from the Bank for International Settlements, the dollar remains by far the most commonly traded currency.10The size and depth of dollar foreign exchange markets mean the dollar is frequently used as a "vehicle" currency: Even when firms and investors around the globe want to transact in two currencies that don't include the dollar, they typically find that it is easier and less expensive to first conduct a trade between the initial currency and the dollar and then conduct a second trade to exchange the dollars for the second currency.11 The final role for an international currency is as a unit of account, and an important measure on this dimension is its use as an "anchor currency" against which other countries may attempt to limit their exchange rate movements. Here, the research finds that the dollar's usage as an anchor currency has increased somewhat over the past two decades. Not including the U.S., economies anchored to the dollar accounted for roughly 50 percent of world gross domestic product (GDP) by 2015. By contrast, the share of world GDP anchored to the euro was only 5 percent (not counting the euro area itself).12 To recap, by standard measures of an international currency's use, there has not been any notable erosion in the dollar's dominance over the past couple of decades. Going forward, however, there are potential challenges to the dollar's international status, and some recent developments have the potential to boost the international use of other currencies. A shifting payments landscape—for example, the rapid growth of digital currencies—could reduce reliance on the U.S. dollar. People often conjecture that cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin may replace the U.S. dollar as the world's reserve currency. But most trading in decentralized finance (DeFi) involve trades using stablecoins, which link their value one-for-one to the U.S. dollar. About 99 percent of stablecoin market capitalization is linked to the U.S. dollar, meaning that crypto-assets are de facto traded in U.S. dollars. So it is likely that any expansion of trading in the DeFi world will simply strengthen the dominant role of the dollar. A second potential challenge to the dollar could be increased prominence of the euro, the second most widely used international currency. Like the U.S., the European Union (EU) is a large economy with fairly deep financial markets, generally free trade, and robust and stable institutions. Wider use of the euro as a reserve currency may have been held back by the lack of a deep and liquid market for EU debt, though there have been some notable recent developments. During the COVID-19 crisis, the EU issued an unprecedented amount of jointly backed debt, reaching about EUR 400 billion by May 2023. While this is a noteworthy development for the EU, this amount is tiny compared with the $24 trillion outstanding in U.S. Treasury securities.13 The continued rapid growth of China and Chinese efforts to boost the use of their currency could make the Chinese renminbi a more attractive competitor to the dollar and increase its international use. Several factors currently weigh against the renminbi as an attractive asset for international investors: It is not freely exchangeable, the Chinese capital account is not open, and investor confidence in Chinese institutions is relatively low. Recent endeavors by China to overcome these shortcomings include increased efforts to promote renminbi invoicing. For example, it reached an agreement with Brazil to allow Chinese and Brazilian companies to settle trade in their domestic currencies and has been in discussion with Saudi Arabia to potentially price oil trade in renminbi. However, outside analysts generally view these agreements as symbolic and at most laying the groundwork for potential future use of the Chinese renminbi in very isolated instances. Some commentators have also argued that sanctions imposed by the United States and its allies on Russia following the invasion of Ukraine could make the dollar less attractive as a reserve currency for the United States's geopolitical adversaries. In practice, however, U.S. adversaries have few practical alternatives to the dollar, as other prominent reserve currencies—such as the euro, Japanese yen, and British pound—are all issued by close U.S. allies, who also participated in sanctions on Russia. More generally, some worry that the dollar's role could be threatened by a move toward so-called geoeconomic fragmentation, in which trade and financial flows realign and become restricted within blocs of allied countries. The formation of a bloc that excludes the U.S.—or even explicitly seeks to counter the United States' role in the global economy—could make some countries less likely to denominate international transactions in dollars. This scenario sounds alarming, but thus far, trends that appear consistent with fragmentation largely can be explained by specific policy actions. One example is the dramatic reallocation of U.S.–China trade in recent years, as firms in each country decrease reliance on imports sourced from the other. While this shift has coincided with a period of heightened geopolitical tensions, the evidence suggests a simpler explanation: firms responding to changes in relative prices, in this case caused by the imposition of reciprocal tariffs by the two countries since 2018. For example, while U.S. imports of tariff-affected goods from China have plunged, imports of goods not subject to tariffs have continued to rise.14Despite the reallocation of trade flows across countries, at the end of the day, those trade flows continue to be invoiced mainly in dollars. A final consideration regarding the international use of the dollar relates to financial stability concerns. In times of global financial stress, investors and governments seek a safe haven to protect the value of their assets and stabilize their own financial markets. When this happens, there is almost always a "flight to the dollar" and heightened demand for U.S. dollar assets. We saw this in 2008 and again in 2020. This is the ultimate vindication that the U.S. dollar is the world's reserve currency and is likely to remain so—in times of global stress, the world runs to the dollar, not away from it. To conclude, for the reasons I have laid out here, I do not expect to see the U.S. dollar lose its status as the world's reserve currency anytime soon, nor even see a significant decline in its primacy in trade and finance. Recent developments that some have warned could threaten that status have, if anything, strengthened it, at least so far. ReferencesAlfaro, Laura, and Davin Chor (2023). "Global Supply Chains: The Looming 'Great Reallocation,'" NBER Working Paper Series 31661. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. Bank for International Settlements (2022).Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Over-the-Counter Derivatives Markets. Basel, Switzerland: BIS, October. Bertaut, Carol, Bastian von Beschwitz, and Stephanie Curcuru (2023). "'The International Role of the U.S. Dollar' Post-COVID Edition," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 23. Bown, Chad P. (2022). "Four Years into the Trade War, Are the US and China Decoupling?" Peterson Institute for International Economics,Realtime Economics(blog), October 20, https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economics/four-years-trade-war-are-us-and-china-decoupling. Devereux, Michael B., and Shouyong Shi (2013). "Vehicle Currency,"International Economic Review,vol. 54 (February), pp. 97–133. Eichengreen, Barry (2011). "Why the Dollar's Reign Is Near an End,"Wall Street Journal,March 2. Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2019). "Exchange Arrangements Entering the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 134 (May), pp. 599–646. Lalouette, Laure, Alejandro Zamora-Pérez, Codruta Rusu, Nikolaus Bartzsch, Emmanuelle Politronacci, Martial Delmas, António Rua, Marco Brandi, and Martti Naksi (2021). "Foreign Demand for Euro Banknotes (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 253. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, January. Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger (2019). "The Rise of the Dollar and Fall of the Euro as International Currencies,"American Economic Review,vol. 109 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 521–26. Pierce, Justin R., and David Yu (2023). "Assessing the Extent of Trade Fragmentation," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 3. Weiss, Colin R. (2023). "Financial Flows to the United States in 2022: Was There Fragmentation?" FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 4. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. I would like to thank Carol Bertaut, Stephanie Curcuru, and Justin Pierce for their support in preparing this text.Return to text 2. See Eichengreen (2011).Return to text 3. See Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger (2019).Return to text 4. See Bertaut, von Beschwitz, and Curcuru (2023).Return to text 5. See Bertaut, von Beschwitz, and Curcuru (2023).Return to text 6. See Bertaut, von Beschwitz, and Curcuru (2023).Return to text 7. See Lalouette and others (2021).Return to text 8. See Bertaut, von Beschwitz, and Curcuru (2023).Return to text 9. See Bertaut, von Beschwitz, and Curcuru (2023).Return to text 10. See Bank for International Settlements (2022).Return to text 11. See Devereux and Shi (2013).Return to text 12. See Ilzetzki et al. (2019).Return to text 13. See Bertaut, von Beschwitz, and Curcuru (2023).Return to text 14. See Bown (2022).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 157th Assembly for Bank Directors, Southwestern Graduate School of Banking, Maui, Hawaii Thank you for the invitation to join you today at the Southwestern Graduate School of Banking's 157th Assembly for Bank Directors.1In light of the recent direction of public policy affecting the financial system and bank regulation, my remarks today will discuss the potential impact of this current approach on the long-term future of banking. Too often, when we think about the future of banking, we focus only on today's most pressing issues and problems, some of which will be fleeting and may not have long-term impacts on the banking system. So today, I would like to take a higher-level view to think about the future of banking over a longer time horizon. My framing will focus on how the past can shed some light on the dynamics that bank leadership must consider in running their banks and that regulators should consider as we regulate and supervise institutions. My hope is that this broader perspective can help to provide bank directors—and even regulators—with some perspective on how today's choices may shape the banking system. Before I delve into the "future" of banking, I want to spend a moment on the "present" of monetary policy and the economy. At our meeting earlier this week, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) kept the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and continued the run-off of the Fed's securities holdings. Inflation readings over the past six months indicate that the Committee's past policy actions are having the intended effect of reducing inflationary pressures. The most recent 12-month readings through December for total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation came in at 2.6 and 2.9 percent respectively, the first time both measures have been below 3 percent since the spring of 2021. I view the slowdown in inflation readings over recent months as encouraging. In addition to this progress on inflation, economic activity has continued to expand at a strong pace while the labor market has remained tight. Further evidence of economic strength showed in the advance report of fourth quarter real gross domestic product (GDP) with an increase of 3.3 percent, partly reflecting ongoing strength in consumer spending, and also in today's employment report with an acceleration in job gains to a very strong pace of around 350,000 for both December and January. The unemployment rate remained low at 3.7 percent. This appears to reverse the trend from last year, when the average pace of job gains slowed and the labor force participation rate rose through November, a sign that labor market demand and supply may have been coming into better balance. That said, today's jobs report with markedly stronger job growth and a labor force participation that has retraced some of its earlier gains suggests that progress has stalled over the past two months. Considering these developments, I voted to maintain the policy rate at its current level while we continue to monitor the incoming data and assess the implications for the inflation and economic outlook. My baseline outlook is that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held at the current level. Should the incoming data continue to indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower our policy rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. In my view, we are not yet at that point. And a number of important upside inflation risks remain. These include risks from geopolitical conditions, including the prominent risk of spillovers from geopolitical conflicts and the extent to which food and energy markets and supply chains remain exposed to these influences. There is also the risk that continued easing in financial conditions could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress in lowering inflation, or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Today's labor market data, which indicated a pickup in wage inflation in recent months, suggests ongoing elevated wage growth as some businesses continue to report above-average wage increases to compensate for inflation. Given these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely—especially the inflation data revisions next week and upcoming inflation reports—as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years, as illustrated in today's employment report, make the task of predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging, and I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. Reducing our policy rate too soon could result in requiring further future policy rate increases to return inflation to 2 percent in the longer run. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, I remain willing to raise the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. The Future of BankingTurning back to the future of banking, today we find ourselves at an interesting juncture in the evolution of the banking system. Some traditional risks—like interest rate risk and liquidity risk—have become a higher priority concern for banks and regulators, while other risks—like cybersecurity and fraud—continue to evolve and pose challenges. And of course, banking regulation and proposed reforms exert pressure on important elements of the banking system, affecting both the size and activities of banks. At the same time, I see important opportunities—and a critical need—for banks to continue supporting their communities and to find new and innovative ways to deliver financial products and services. Bankers and regulators alike must think about these dynamics and how they will impact the future of the banking system, including safety and soundness, U.S. financial stability, the future role of banks in the U.S. financial system, and how our actions today could have long-term consequences. The Risk of ComplacencyBanks have an obligation to manage all material risks, and yet we see that even with traditional risks—interest rate and liquidity risk, for example—long periods of calm, such as those that followed the prolonged period of low interest rates following the 2008 financial crisis, can lull both bankers and regulators into a state of complacency. Often, this complacency stems from false assumptions, assumptions that prove to be inaccurate over time. For example, leading up to the 2008 financial crisis there was an unrealistic expectation that housing values would continue to appreciate. Those who relied on this expectation made choices that proved to be ill-advised in the long run resulting in severe economic consequences. Likewise, the persistently low interest rates that were a legacy of the post-2008 financial crisis period led some to chase yield in their securities investment portfolios, over-investing in fixed-rate, long-term securities relying on the belief that long-term interest rates would remain low in perpetuity. Regulators themselves—while increasingly aware of and focused on these risks over time—were late to the game in terms of taking strong, proactive action, both in the lead-up to the 2008 financial crisis, and more recently, in the lead-up to the banking stress in the spring of 2023. In each of these cases, false assumptions led to complacency, which resulted in an inability to appropriately recognize and appreciate the early signs of risk that ultimately stressed the banking system and the broader economy. But how do we protect the banking system against the risks that come from complacency? For bankers, I think this requires a constant focus on risks, both traditional and emerging. To be clear, many bankers live with this mindset every day; they know their borrowers and communities, and they carefully monitor traditional and emerging risks—and manage those risks—on an ongoing basis. In many ways, complacency can result in overlooking risks even on matters that are universal in the management of all banks, like succession planning and information technology management. We know that many banks, particularly those in rural markets, face significant challenges when planning effective leadership succession. Absent appropriate succession planning, often the only options for a bank can be a sale to a competitor or ceasing operations, both of which can harm the bank's local community. Even the management of information technology can pose significant risks if a bank fails to devote sufficient resources to maintaining and updating systems, or if a bank fails to appropriately integrate and update legacy systems, such as after a bank acquisition or merger.2 For regulators, the cure for complacency is consistent attention even to dormant risks, and an appropriately robust response when issues are identified. Complacency is not always the product of inattention but can also arise because of mis-prioritization, such as when regulators focus on risks that are tangential to statutory mandates and critical areas of responsibility. This kind of misprioritization can increase the risk that regulators overlook areas that require more immediate attention. Sometimes, familiar risks emerge in new ways. Having a concentrated, monoline business model and experiencing rapid growth are both well-known risks to ongoing viability, even though the particulars may vary over time. During the banking stress in 2023, several banks that experienced particularly acute stress had concentrated exposures or monoline business models, for example, with a heavy exposure to customers in the crypto-asset industry. The cyclical nature of regulatory issues itself presents a challenge for regulators. Over time, examiner attrition and retirements that come along with an aging workforce erode institutional knowledge, expertise, and experience, making it more difficult to maintain an appropriate focus on longstanding risks. As we look to the future of banking, we should consider the dynamic nature of the banking system and know that we must be assertive in identifying known and emerging risks, and nimble in responding to them, keeping in mind that risks that appear to be extinct may only be hibernating. Banking Changes Bring New RisksOf course, even with a relentless focus on the known risks that affect the banking system—credit risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk, cyber risk, and others—we also know that as the banking system evolves, the risks evolve as well. Even though change in the banking system is constant, many banking services have stayed relatively similar over time. The use of paper checks, while helpful to consumers in many ways, have re-emerged as a source of increased fraud risk. The advent of the automated teller machine (ATM) and electronic banking opened up new avenues for banks to bring convenience and access to their customers, but also gave criminals new opportunities to attack the banking infrastructure. Even the legal and regulatory changes that allowed interstate banking to flourish fundamentally altered the composition of the banking sector, bringing both greater efficiencies of scale as banks took advantage of opportunities to consolidate, but also putting pressure on some banking models—and perhaps perversely resulting in less availability of local banking options in some geographic and socioeconomic areas. Of course, recent changes provide consumers with enhanced options for services, including improvements to the U.S. payment system. Recent enhancements in real-time payments services have made them more widely available. But with this growth comes additional risk, including limitations on the ability to detect and prevent fraud. Banks also increasingly rely on important relationships with third parties, including service providers and partners who provide services to customers through "banking-as-a-service" arrangements. As third-party relationships continue to play an increasingly critical role in the banking system, they present another new avenue for risks that must be managed. Emerging risks often arise in the context of a new mindset we see among some bank directors and management. This mindset is often associated with the culture of technology companies—a "move fast and break things" philosophy that can be incompatible with prudent banking practices. Prudent banking, in contrast with a start-up culture, requires a cautious approach to new business models, a recognition of and respect for operating in a regulated industry, and an appropriate degree of expertise and oversight. Merging these philosophies—the need to innovate in an increasingly competitive banking industry, and the need to have management and board oversight that is appropriate in the highly regulated banking system—can be difficult but is critical for long-term success. Having appropriate expertise to engage in new activities within a bank can be particularly challenging with the seemingly constant advent of new technologies, like artificial intelligence, that have the potential to transform banking. While innovation in banking is important, banks may have difficulty attracting relevant expertise. But with the potential of new technologies comes grave responsibilities to ensure that they are well understood, well-managed, and used appropriately when they are introduced in a banking environment. The banking system is not an unregulated petri dish. Regulators play a vital role in making sure the banking system is safe and sound in light of these evolving risks. At a threshold matter, regulators must consider the many tradeoffs involved in how to support banks in their quest to be agile in offering new services and responding to new and evolving risks, and in how to appropriately identify, supervise, and regulate these risks. In my view, one of the most important roles of regulators in the face of changes to the banking system is to support responsible innovation as banks provide credit to their communities and customers.3In doing so, they must provide clear guidance to regulated institutions to help facilitate effective risk management, and support safety and soundness. The "start-up" mindset can be a particular challenge for regulators, as the communication of traditional supervisory messages may not resonate when delivered to directors and bank management that are not accustomed to interacting with examiners, or who are unfamiliar with operating a business in a regulated industry. In these situations, regulators must communicate clearly to ensure bank leadership understands and recognizes that safety and soundness must always be a key priority. The approach of asking forgiveness instead of permission is not compatible with the banking system. Neither regulators nor banks have the ability to predict the future, and yet as we look back on large structural shifts in the banking system, many of these longer-term trends were foreseeable. As we consider these ongoing evolutions in terms of both risks and opportunities, we must remember the fundamental role of banks in providing credit to consumers and businesses, including small- and medium-sized businesses. Regulatory Dynamics and the Regulatory PerimeterEarlier this year, I shared three resolutions that will guide my approach to regulation in the coming year, and beyond: I continue to believe that adherence to these principles will help buttress the safety and soundness of banks. In some ways, these priorities focus on the "how" of regulation and supervision—how we engage in prioritization of supervision, how we make policy decisions, and how we engage with regulated institutions and the public. Of course, another equally important consideration—relevant for regulators and those who run banks—is the "why," which goals and objectives should be kept in mind in the execution of these responsibilities. An awareness of the impacts of regulation and supervision—the intended and unintended consequences of changes to the bank regulatory framework—must underpin the regulatory process. Policymakers often acknowledge that the diversity of banks—with a wide range of sizes, locations, and activities—contributes to the strength of the banking system. As I have noted in the past, research supports this perspective.5Banking reforms that result in over-regulation, or excessive compliance burdens that are disproportionate to risk, can threaten the banking system, and by extension, the U.S. economy. The cyclical nature of risks—and the perception that fundamental transformation of the regulatory framework is the only cure—can often contribute to instability in the regulatory approach and in the financial system. Targeted changes—changes that ensureongoingattention to long-recognized risks and nimbleness to deal with emerging risks—can often be more efficient and effective in addressing the concerns on a permanent basis. I do not envy bankers that have to deal with regulatory whiplash. Establishing a consistent framework to deal with regulatory risks, a framework that is broadly supported through consensus and analysis, is often a better and more permanent solution to enhance safety and soundness than more pronounced swings of the regulatory pendulum. As the role of banks continues to evolve, we must continue to ask difficult questions about the functioning of the regulatory framework, and whether it requires adjustments: How do we define a "community bank" for purposes of tailoring regulations to risks? What are the implications of regulatory cliff effects, like those around regulatory capital thresholds under the Basel III endgame and long-term debt proposals, where there is a new, stark line at $100 billion in assets? Will regulatory proposals effectively impact the viability of certain institutions, particularly those clustered around regulatory thresholds? What would the loss of these smaller institutions mean for credit availability and pricing? In all of these policy decisions, banks must not be passive observers. They must ensure the that regulators and policymakers recognize and understand their important role and the impacts of considered changes to ensure their viability in the future. Of course, while we often think of the banking system as being defined by a "regulatory perimeter"—a line that distinguishes institutions that are subject to direct oversight from those that are not—this line in some ways blinds us from some of the important and unintended consequences we must consider in shaping the regulatory framework. Banks are an integral part of the larger financial system, and financial risks, including financial stability risks, are not unique to banks. For example, we know that the cost of capital influences not only the pricing of financial services offered by banks, butwhereactivities occur, either within the regulatory perimeter or in nonbank entities and the shadow-banking system. I worry about the migration of risks across this line and what it means for the stability of the U.S. financial system. But I am particularly concerned about intentional regulatory actions that actuallypushactivity to the nonbank financial system. In my view, this structural dynamic—where activities occur and how those choices are influenced by regulation—is one that banks themselves must be concerned with, as over the long-term, it will affect every decision they make about the products and services they offer. While regulatory choices can affect the scope of the regulatory perimeter, these choices can also help to mitigate the flow of risk between the permeable boundary separating regulated banks and other companies. Regulators often address risks in the financial system by focusing on regulated banks, promoting up-front due diligence of bank partners, monitoring the risks of these relationships, and placing accountability for issues that arise on the banks themselves. A potentially underused tool that could be used to address these risks is oversight of third-party service providers under the authority granted to banking regulators under the Bank Service Company Act. Better aligning supervisory attention with the source of risk in this way could be a more efficient mechanism to address risks on the borders of the regulatory perimeter. ClosingIn closing, thank you again to the Southwestern Graduate School of Banking for the invitation to discuss my thoughts about the future of banking. Bank management and directors face significant challenges in preparing for an unpredictable future, a future that will be impacted by emerging risks, new business opportunities, regulatory actions, and many other factors beyond a bank's immediate control. While the factors I have highlighted do not—and could not possibly—provide a roadmap to the future, they do provide a different way of thinking about the long-term challenges and opportunities in the banking industry, a perspective that may be helpful for bank directors, bankers—and even for regulators. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Notably, information technology issues continue to be one of the most frequently cited findings in supervisory examinations of regional banking organizations and community banking organizations. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, November 2023), figure 16, "Outstanding supervisory findings by category, CBO firms," and figure 17, "Outstanding supervisory findings by category, RBO firms."Return to text 3. See Michelle W. Bowman, "The Innovation Imperative: Modernizing Traditional Banking," speech at the Independent Community Bankers of America ICBA Live 2023 Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, March 14, 2023.Return to text 4. See Michelle W. Bowman, "New Year's Resolutions for Bank Regulatory Policymakers," speech at the South Carolina Bankers Association 2024 Community Bankers Conference, Columbia, South Carolina, January 8, 2024.Return to text 5. See Michelle W. Bowman, "The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in Banking Reforms," speech at the 2023 Community Banking Research Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri, October 4, 2023.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At Basel Committee on Banking Supervision-Federal Reserve Counterparty Credit Risk Conference, New York, New York Thank you for the opportunity to be part of this important discussion on counterparty credit risk.1It's particularly appropriate for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to host these discussions. Twenty-five years ago, New York Fed officials convened the creditors of Long-Term Capital Management (LTMC) to facilitate the firm's stabilization. LTCM was a heavily leveraged hedge fund that had borrowed more than $125 billion from its counterparties and had derivatives estimated at over $1 trillion in notional value. Stabilizing LTCM narrowly averted significant financial stress, an event I remember vividly from my vantage point as a Treasury official at the time. That event prompted deep reflection on both the risks presented by nonbanks such as hedge funds and the state of counterparty credit risk management practices by banks that finance their activities. The more recent failure of Archegos Capital Management resulted in over $10 billion of reported losses across several banks and revealed many of the same gaps in how banks manage their exposure to investment funds, which are far larger today than at the time of LTCM's collapse. Managing these exposures has become more challenging as the financial system has become more complex, diverse, and interconnected. For example, the sudden rise in commodities prices in March 2022 rippled around the global financial system in part because of the sudden rise in margin requirements on commodities derivatives as the stress hit. Further, an increasingly varied and evolving collection of nonbank clients, including pension funds and asset managers, is playing a significant role in the global economy and presenting new and unconsidered risks. For instance, losses in 2022 in the liability-driven investments of pension funds in the United Kingdom demonstrated how even traditionally safe exposures, such as government bonds, when combined with excessive leverage, can threaten the stability of bank counterparties and the global financial system. These events highlight why counterparty credit risk is such an important risk discipline. Banks have made important progress since the failure of Archegos to improve counterparty credit risk management practices because of their own reflection on the lessons learned from Archegos and in response to supervisory input. For instance, banks have improved information disclosures from clients, adopted risk-sensitive margin practices to a greater extent, and enhanced tools to manage risk. Going forward, the Federal Reserve plans to continue its focus on fundamental risk management related to counterparty credit risk, and I'll focus my remarks on three themes. First, banks should know their customers exceedingly well, both at onboarding and throughout the evolution of the relationship. Second, banks should have tools to identify the unique risks they face as these risks materialize across products, business lines, and clients and use these risk measures to maintain appropriate margins through the credit cycle. Third, banks should set prudent risk limits and respond to signals of risk appropriately. These risk management practices are important to help control the build-up of risk—preventing banks and the banking system from taking on outsized exposure to leveraged entities and preventing the build-up of that leverage. These credit risk management practices are important complements to prudent liquidity risk management and resilience measures, such as contingency planning, in which banks take steps to mitigate the impact of distress of a counterparty to the bank and the financial system more broadly. The Federal Reserve will also use its own tools to assess counterparty credit risk in the banking system. For example, alongside this year's stress test results, we will publish the aggregate results of several exploratory analyses, including analysis of the resilience of the globally systemically important banks to the simultaneous default of their five largest hedge fund counterparties. We will conduct that analysis under two different sets of financial market conditions to learn about how such exposures may vary across different types of stresses. We expect the information yielded from that analysis will deepen our supervisory understanding of counterparty credit risk at the banks. As we noted, the exploratory analysis will not affect bank capital requirements. There will be more to come on that in June, but for now let me speak about the risk management practices we plan to focus on in our ongoing supervision.2 Thorough Due DiligenceAs with many things in banking and business, strong risk management starts with knowing your customers. In traditional lending, a lender should understand the finances and exposures of the borrower to ensure it will be able to pay back the loan. A lender should also understand the borrower's managerial and financial history, profitability goals and the risk-taking to achieve them, and how those goals may change over time. And once the loan is made, lenders should do the hard work to continually obtain necessary and timely information about the borrower. This understanding is especially important when customers are counterparties in complex or dynamic trading activities. Banks need reliable, comprehensive, granular, and frequent information about their counterparties to make prudent decisions. Obtaining this information can be challenging because of client activity happening away from the bank. Having only partial disclosure of the positions of a counterparty prevents banks from understanding the vulnerabilities in the counterparty's risk profile, such as excessive concentrations and leverage, that could lead to major losses. If a counterparty is unwilling to offer an appropriate level of disclosure, the bank should take this into account in whether to deal with the counterparty and the terms that it offers if it nonetheless chooses to lend or provide other services. In the case of both LTCM and Archegos, the lack of appreciation for their overall size, leverage, and concentration was a significant factor in explaining the deficiencies in how banks risk-managed their exposures to those funds. This lack of transparency contributed to remarkable growth of the funds' positions and exacerbated the risk to counterparty banks from their collapse. Measuring Risk and the Importance of MarginingNext, I'll discuss the importance of identifying and measuring counterparty credit risks, as well as mitigating those risks through sound margining practices. Sound counterparty risk measurement rests upon four important foundations. The first involves understanding a counterparty's risk profile through a range of risk measurement tools. In contrast to many traditional lending relationships, trading activities can be more complex and riskier, which demands more nuance and attention in risk measurement. Second, banks should conduct risk aggregation within and across products, business lines, and clients. Large trading clients may have varied exposures across different products, asset classes, and business lines at the bank. Managing this effectively requires the bank to understand how these risks fit together and how they add up. Third, banks should have capabilities for timely and accurate risk measurement given the dynamic and complex nature of trading activities. There should be appropriate understanding of the risk measurement tools used within the organization—including their strengths and limitations—to allow for appropriate use and action. Fourth, based on their assessment of the risk, it is important that banks maintain appropriate levels of margin to insulate them from loss. Risk-based margining and associated terms and conditions are an important and often necessary part of the counterparty credit risk management toolkit. Margining practices should be conservative and appropriately risk-sensitive because financial markets can change rapidly. Waiting to increase margins until markets become volatile and the risks apparent can, ironically, create additional risk. Margining practices are important for all asset classes, including highly liquid assets such as Treasury securities. The strength of the Treasury markets relies on its resilience and elasticity in both normal times and episodes of stress. Prudent margin practices both protect banks extending credit against safe assets and promote market functioning, as they limit the extent to which firms can obtain outsized positions that require disorderly liquidation and exacerbate price volatility. As noted in a previous speech, liquidation of leveraged Treasury positions by hedge funds appears to have contributed to the Treasury market stress in March 2020.3 Importantly, weakening standards on margin or terms and conditions should not be a negotiation point to win business. In a competitive business landscape, it is easy to see how exceptions to the rules can become common practice, leading to weaker counterparty practices across the sector. If banks are not resolute in their standards, a cascade of weaker margin practices and terms and conditions could lead to unacceptable levels of risk for individual banks and the broader financial system. Setting Risk Limits and Responding AppropriatelyMy next area of focus relates to setting prudent counterparty credit risk limits and responding when those limits are breached. Risk limits establish how much risk a bank is willing to accept, and escalation and remediation processes determine what a bank should do if a counterparty nears or breaches a limit. Proactive measures can help ensure that banks take action to manage risks before they become too acute and avoid the need for destabilizing actions in times of stress. In past failures, we observed banks established what had seemed like reasonable limits at the time; however, these banks did not always act in a timely manner when those limits were breached. Counterparty credit exposures can evolve rapidly as conditions in the financial markets change or counterparty risk profiles shift. As a result, a quick response is critical for risk managers in responding to these signals. Strong governance and a robust risk culture are some of the most important factors in ensuring durable and effective management of counterparty credit risk. Banks should have multiple measures of counterparty risk, regularly use those measures to identify material risk, and respond in those cases. Still, it does not matter if a bank has ample reporting, the best counterparty risk measurement capabilities in the world, and perfectly calibrated limits: if risks are ignored by key decisionmakers, or if individuals with responsibility for managing the risk don't have influence on the firm's business decisions, the firm is not engaging in effective credit risk management. Of course, having good governance and risk culture is in part about the basics: banks should ensure that they have capable people with the skills necessary to manage the risk; adequate staffing levels; strong documentation; and clear roles, responsibilities, and accountability. It also means banks need to create a risk culture that prioritizes timely and comprehensive communication and information sharing across the organization, and that banks respect the views of risk managers about when to avoid taking bad risks. International Cooperation Is VitalCounterparty credit risk can have global implications because financial markets, and banks' trading businesses and their clients, are often global. International cooperation is vital to promote the smooth functioning of markets that move around the globe and to ensure a level playing field for American financial institutions. After the failure of LTCM, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision published "Sound Practices for Banks' Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions," much of which remains relevant today.4As this gathering shows, the Basel Committee continues to play a leading role in bringing together bank supervisors to solve challenging problems that cross borders and recommending solutions to ensure consistent global standards. This conference is also a byproduct of the default of Archegos in March 2021, which was a counterparty of numerous banks. As supervisors of some of those institutions, the Federal Reserve and the United Kingdom's Prudential Regulation Authority led a valuable post-mortem effort with numerous other domestic and international supervisory authorities to investigate the causes and associated risk management failures that led to such significant and widespread financial stress. ConclusionWe all have an interest in seeing that counterparty credit risk management practices are commensurate with the inherent complexity, materiality, and interconnectedness of trading activities. This is even more important today than when LTCM collapsed in 1998. Since that time, the hedge fund industry is much larger, with funds currently reporting around $9 trillion in assets,5and many funds are leveraged and interconnected with major banks. Getting this right is in the interest of banks, their customers, and the public, which depends on a stable and strong financial system. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. See also Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Supervisory Guidance Regarding Counterparty Credit Risk Management,"SR letter 99-3 (February 1, 1999); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Interagency Counterparty Credit Risk Management Guidance," SR letter 11-10 (July 5, 2011); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "The Federal Reserve Reminds Firms of Safe and Sound Practices for Counterparty Credit Risk Management in Light of the Archegos Capital Management Default," SR letter 21-19 (December 10, 2021).Return to text 3. Michael S. Barr,remarksat The 2023 U.S. Treasury Market Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, November 16, 2023.Return to text 4. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "Sound Practices for Banks' Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions (PDF)" (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, January 1999).Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, October 2023).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the 40th Annual National Association for Business Economics (NABE) Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. Thank you for having me here today. After having had to miss this conference last year, I greatly appreciate the opportunity to join you. As you might expect, I was a little busy in March 2023, and I will share some thoughts on lessons learned from the stress in the banking system at that time, in particular what we have learned in terms of liquidity risk management.1 But first, I will start by discussing recent economic developments and the implications for monetary policy. I will then turn to the banking sector and will focus on some topics that lie at the intersection of the composition of the Fed's balance sheet, market functioning, bank liquidity risk management, and the Fed's role in liquidity provision. Starting with economic developments, I think it is helpful to reflect on how surprised most watchers of the economy were by developments in 2023, me included. Perhaps like many of you, at the start of 2023 I had projected that tighter monetary policy would cause a slowdown in both inflation and economic activity. Then, with the March 2023 banking stress, I was concerned that a potential credit contraction could further weaken the economy. At the same time, I also worried that inflation might remain elevated, even if we had weaker economic activity, as supply chain problems and job-matching challenges continued to be prominent elements of the pandemic's disruption to the operation of our economy. I am glad to say that those worries did not come to pass, in part due to the official sector response to the banking stress, sound monetary policy, and a healing economy. Economic activity expanded at a solid pace, the labor market remained strong, and inflation came down significantly. Disinflation and a growing economyThe current mix of outcomes we are experiencing would have seemed improbable one year ago, and we might ask, how did we end up with disinflation and an economy with brisk growth? The short answer is the healing of the economy. The pandemic brought our economy to a screeching halt. During the second quarter of 2020, the unemployment rate jumped to a high of 14.8 percent and gross domestic product plunged at a 28 percent annual pace. These dynamics hit some of the most vulnerable populations the most, though strong government responses helped to both ease the effects and make many households much more resilient. Once the economy restarted, demand rebounded quickly, while supply was hampered by supply chain difficulties. These supply snags were compounded enormously by a shift in demand away from in-person services and toward goods, which generally have a larger exposure to shipping and supply chain problems. Supply shocks to the global economy were subsequently compounded by Russia's war against Ukraine, which severely disrupted food and energy markets. And labor markets were disrupted by the pandemic as well. Employers could not find enough workers, and job-matching was impaired. An important component of post-pandemic healing has been the recovery of supply chains after the pandemic-induced bottlenecks in both goods production and distribution. Recent shipping disruptions show supply chain conditions are still an issue, but compared to pandemic-era constraints, we are in a much better position. For example, the price to ship a 40-foot container from China to the West Coast has recently risen to around $4,000, about twice the pre-pandemic level, but it is far below the $20,000 rate in 2021. Another key component of the improvement in supply has been in the labor market. We have seen substantial improvements in the labor force through both stronger immigration and higher labor force participation rates, notably by women. As supply has improved, labor demand has cooled, but this cooling has manifested largely in a reduction in job vacancies, rather than layoffs. At the same time, we have seen the labor market working more efficiently—for example, with improved job matching after the large disruptions during the pandemic. The improvements in labor supply and labor market functioning have allowed the unemployment rate to hold steady at a low level. The strong labor market has broadly improved the lives of Americans, and particularly so for groups that have long suffered significantly higher unemployment levels and whose jobless rates respond more forcefully to the business cycle. Improvements in productivityAnother key part of the story in the post-pandemic healing of our economy has been the growth of productivity. While measures of productivity tend to be volatile, productivity growth has picked up in the past year. Increased productivity is, in part, likely coming from components that will continue to yield improvements, such as the integration of new technology, new ways of working, and the large increases in new business formation. Growth in new businesses has been found to lead to productivity gains, likely because new entrants innovate, and legacy firms must also innovate to compete with new entrants. These increases in productivity are also consistent with real wage gains, one measure of rising living standards. The net result of all this healing of the economy is that growth has been robust even as upward pressure on inflation has diminished. This healing has been helping both sides of our dual mandate over the past year. Monetary policy has been essential in this process. Higher interest rates have helped to restrain demand, giving supply the opportunity to catch up. Monetary policy has also anchored inflation expectations. Longer-term inflation expectations have stayed anchored, and shorter-term expectations have fallen. The Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) preferred inflation gauge has fallen from a peak of 7.1 percent in June 2022 to 2.6 percent in December 2023. We have made this progress while unemployment has remained near a 50-year low. As central bankers, we always need to consider the full range of risks to achieving both our goals. We are always assessing risks on the horizon, including the risk of an economic slowdown that could reduce employment, or the risk that inflation does not stay on its path of sustainably returning to 2 percent. As Chair Powell indicated in his most recent press conference, my FOMC colleagues and I are confident we are on a path to 2 percent inflation, but we need to see continued good data before we can begin the process of reducing the federal funds rate. I fully support what he called a careful approach to considering policy normalization given current conditions. January's report on consumer price index inflation is a reminder that the path back to 2 percent inflation may be a bumpy one.i Given the limited historical experience with the growth and inflation dynamics we currently face, and no modern experience of emerging from a global pandemic, we have yet another reason to proceed carefully, as we have been doing. Banking conditionsNext, I want to turn to current banking conditions, lessons learned from the March 2023 banking stress in terms of liquidity risk management, and how we can put those lessons to use for a resilient banking system. Starting with current banking conditions, the banking system remains sound and resilient, and it is in much better shape than it was last spring. However, there are a few pockets of risk that we continue to watch, including the pandemic's persistent impact on office commercial real estate in certain central business districts.2 Just a couple of weeks ago, disappointing earnings and higher loss provisions at one bank precipitated significant declines in stock prices. A single bank missing its revenue expectations and increasing its provisioning does not change the fact that the overall banking system is strong, and we see no signs of liquidity problems across the system. Nevertheless, we continue to monitor conditions carefully across the sector, just as we always do. A few lessons from March 2023Crucial to banks being resilient is effective liquidity risk management. That was clear in March 2023 and remains so now. We learned that runs can materialize with unprecedented speed and severity, spreading contagion. Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) lost $40 billion in deposits in a single day, and the firm's management expected to lose $100 billion more the following day. In total, that represented about 85 percent of the firm's deposits.3The runs on SVB and, shortly thereafter, on Signature Bank and First Republic, each of which lost around 20 percent of deposits within hours, were much faster than we had seen in previous episodes.4 The runs on all three were also especially severe, driven in part by imprudent funding reliance on uninsured deposits placed by concentrated and often highly networked customer bases. These deposits proved flightier than previously assumed. For example, SVB's depositors were heavily concentrated in venture capital and technology-sector firms, Signature Bank had uninsured depositors from crypto-related firms, and First Republic had high concentrations of high-net-worth uninsured depositors. Many of these uninsured depositors rapidly withdrew their balances, resulting in deposit flows that were much higher than assumed under the standardized liquidity requirements, such as the liquidity coverage ratio. At the same time that these institutions faced these outflows, they also faced challenges meeting them with available assets. Firms, even those with large stocks of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA), were not sufficiently prepared to monetize these assets—that is, to turn them into cash. Challenges with monetization can be especially acute for securities designated as held-to-maturity (HTM). As interest rates increase and the value of HTM securities goes down, banks that account for them at amortized cost do not have to reflect the decline in market value on their balance sheets. But selling even a portion of an HTM portfolio results in a firm needing to recognize losses on the entire portfolio, a hit to capital. The ability to turn HTM assets into cash, particularly when sales are not feasible, is limited by a firm's ability to ramp up access to secured funding sources, which proved problematic in large size last March. Many banks have been analyzing these dynamics and have taken steps to address these risks. Over the past year, for example, we have seen banks reducing their reliance on HTM for liquidity purposes, adjusting the composition of their HQLA portfolios, and enhancing their ability to tap different sources of liquidity. They have also been updating their contingency funding plans. These improved practices are important for both individual firm resilience and aggregate financial stability.5 Additionally, I remain focused on how we can improve bank readiness to tap the Fed's discount window. The discount window provides ready access to liquidity, including when forms of market funding come under strain. But banks should do some preparation to be fully ready to tap the window. That includes pre-positioning collateral and testing discount window usage. While banks do their part to get operationally ready, we at the Federal Reserve also need to continue to improve discount window operations. Bank liquidity needs also relate directly to the evolution of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The Fed's Senior Financial Officer Survey shows that banks now prefer to manage to higher reserve levels than they did pre-COVID, with several citing the March liquidity stress as a significant driver.6 Right now, the Federal Reserve is implementing monetary policy with plentiful reserves in the system, even as we continue to run down the balance sheet with sizable securities redemptions every month. This process has been operating smoothly. So far, balance sheet asset reduction has largely been accompanied on the liability side of our balance sheet by large declines in overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) usage, rather than reductions in reserves. Since the ON RRP remains sizable, we still have a buffer before reserves begin to decline in a meaningful way. The FOMC reiterated in May 2022 that it plans to operate monetary policy with an ample-reserves regime over time.7As many market commentators have pointed out, it may be difficult to determine what level of reserves is consistent with "ample." The market dynamics from September 2019 illustrate this; when repo rates spiked and these pressures spilled over into the federal funds market, the Fed had to rapidly ramp up operations to add reserves to the banking system. This episode was a factor leading to the establishment of the standing repo facility, which, along with the discount window, will help dampen pressures that could emerge in short-term money markets.8I am pleased to see that there has been a steady growth in the number of firms signed up for the facility, and that current bank counterparties to the facility engage in regular testing as a part of maintaining access. Despite these improvements in our tools, it is also important to closely monitor market conditions wellbeforepressures emerge. There are a variety of market indicators that we can track closely to assess whether banks are beginning to have difficulty accessing reserves in a way that could affect the constellation of short-term rates. We are also watching for signs of frictions in the redistribution of reserves that may not be immediately evident in wholesale funding markets. These frictions could result from a variety of factors including the fact that smaller banks generally have a less diverse array of wholesale market funding options to tap when they need to bolster reserve positions. So we will be approaching these questions carefully. The Committee is planning to begin in-depth discussions of balance sheet issues soon. In conclusion, I hope my remarks have given you a sense of how I view the current state of the economy as well as the path that has gotten us here. Economic healing is helping us to lower inflation while growth remains solid. That is to the great benefit of the American people. The banking sector is sound, and I am focused on ensuring its continued resiliency. One aspect of this work is carefully examining the links between bank liquidity, market functioning, the Federal Reserve's liquidity provision, and the evolution of our balance sheet. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. These risks have been discussed in recent editions of theFinancial Stability Report,which are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/financial-stability-report.htm.Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April).Return to text 4. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2023),FDIC's Supervision of Signature Bank(PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, April); Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2023),FDIC's Supervision of First Republic Bank(PDF)(Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, September).Return to text 5. I have discussed the importance of prudent liquidity risk management in a number of previous speeches; see, for example, Michael S. Barr (2023),"The Importance of Effective Liquidity Risk Management,"speech delivered at the ECB Forum on Banking Supervision, Frankfurt, Germany, December 1.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),Senior Financial Officer Survey Results(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, September); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023),Senior Financial Officer Survey Results(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May).Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022),"FOMC Communications Related to Policy Normalization,"webpage. Note that the original statement was in January 2019; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019),"Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization,"press release, January 30.Return to text 8. Both the standing repo facility and the FIMA repo facility were established in July 2021; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),"Statement Regarding Repurchase Agreement Arrangements,"press release, July 28.Return to text i. Note: On February 26, 2024, a typo was corrected to change an erroneous reference of the “consumer product index” to “consumer price index”: “January's report on consumer price index inflation is a reminder that the path back to 2 percent inflation may be a bumpy one.”Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. I am very pleased to be speaking here at the Brookings Institution, one of the country's premier centers for policy discussion and analysis.1As you all know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been working to lower inflation in the context of achieving our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Today I will discuss recent economic developments in the U.S., talk about how I approach our dual mandate, and explain how I view the current stance of monetary policy. By way of introducing myself, my career in both academia and public service has included a focus on both labor markets and inflation. In my academic work, I have explored various aspects of labor markets—including the effects of labor market policies and the role of educational attainment, among other topics—as well as detailed measurement of productivity and prices. As the chief economist at the U.S. Department of Labor, I engaged regularly with the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which produces data on both employment and inflation. I have approached these topics through both a rigorous focus on measurement considerations and a broader view of the real-world experiences of the people who underlie the headline data. I will continue to do that as a member of the FOMC. With that background, I will now turn to recent economic developments and the outlook for this year. The pace of inflation continues to slow. Twelve-month inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) index, was 2.6 percent in December, down from its peak of 7.1 percent in June 2022. And the six-month rate for PCE inflation was even lower, at 2 percent. While the FOMC uses PCE inflation for our 2 percent target, we also look to core PCE inflation, which excludes more volatile food and energy prices, as an indication of the underlying inflation trend. Core PCE inflation was 2.9 percent in December, also down from its high of 5.6 percent in February 2022, and six-month core PCE inflation was just 1.9 percent in December. We have made great progress. The slowing in total and core PCE inflation that we have seen over the past year or so is the most dramatic since the early 1980s—even though this progress has been uneven from month to month. I like to look under the hood of the inflation numbers for clues about the inflation outlook. A lot of the disinflation we have seen has come from the goods sector, where many prices have actually fallen as demand has cooled and supply chains have mostly healed from pandemic disruptions. Price declines in the goods sector have been helpful, though the core goods category constitutes less than one-fourth of the total PCE index. We have seen less—though still meaningful—progress on services inflation, but there are reasons for optimism. Measures of housing services inflation are naturally persistent; tenant rents move slowly because of the prevalence of year-long lease agreements, and estimates of owner housing costs are imputed based in large part using those tenant rents. These measures react only gradually to data on newly signed rental agreements, and such data do suggest continued easing of housing services inflation—a category that accounts for about 15 percent of the total PCE index. That leaves us with the category of core services excluding housing. This category saw a 12-month inflation of 3.3 percent in December, down considerably from its peak of 5.2 percent in December 2021. Continued overall disinflation will depend heavily on core services excluding housing, which accounts for roughly half of the total PCE index. While this category's inflation rate is still elevated, there is reason to expect improvement, as I will discuss now. I see three factors as likely to contribute to continued disinflation, especially in the category of core services excluding housing: continued moderation of wage growth, normalization of price-setting behavior by firms, and anchored inflation expectations. First, the disinflationary process is being helped by wage growth moderation associated with the ongoing cooling of the labor market. The pace of payroll gains has slowed considerably over the past couple of years. The three-month average of payroll gains surged above 700,000 in mid-2021 and then trended down through 2022 and 2023. Of course, last week's payroll report was quite strong. And the three-month average gain jumped to nearly 300,000. But the broader trend has been one of moderating gains. This moderation in payroll growth largely reflects cooling demand. Actual hiring and hiring plans have eased, as is evident in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, or JOLTS, data and in other business surveys as well.2Job openings have also declined, such that the ratio of openings to unemployment has come down to 1.5 from a peak of 2.0 and is now closer to the pre-pandemic ratio of 1.2. I am pleased that this cooling of labor demand has been accomplished without a marked rise in layoffs, which would impose hardships and difficult transitions for individuals, families, and communities. At the same time, labor supply has improved significantly, returning to pre-pandemic levels. Labor force participation has risen sharply for prime-age workers since early in the pandemic, particularly among women, who last year reached the highest participation rate on record. And we have seen an increase in immigration—a source of workers that is particularly important for certain sectors. For example, in the construction sector, about one-fourth of all workers are non-natives, and in leisure and hospitality, the share is about one-fifth.3 With easing labor demand and robust labor supply, we have seen a slowing trend for wage growth. Of course, as a general matter, I prefer to see robust growth of workers' wages, but for wage growth to be sustainable, it must be consistent with 2 percent inflation. Further wage growth slowing is likely to be important for ongoing disinflation, particularly in the labor-intensive services industries. For private services overall, 12-month growth of average hourly earnings was 4.4 percent in January, down from its peak pace of 6.1 percent in March 2022. More specifically, in the leisure and hospitality sector, earnings growth was 4.4 percent in January, down from a peak rate of 13.9 percent in late 2021. In education and health, earnings rose 3.7 percent in January, versus a peak pace of 6.9 percent in late 2021. Some of these sectors did see a pickup in wage growth in January, but the broader cooling trend is clear. I mention these sectors because they exemplify just how labor intensive the services sector can be. For example, labor costs are roughly 60 percent of value-added in leisure and hospitality and more than 80 percent of value-added in education and health services.4An easing of labor-cost growth in these and other labor-intensive services industries is likely to be passed on to consumers as lower prices and to help reduce inflationary pressures. The second factor that is likely to contribute to continued disinflation has to do with how frequently individual prices are adjusted by firms. Research by Federal Reserve Board staff and others has found that the rise in inflation during 2021 and 2022 mostly reflected firms changing prices more frequently, rather than firms making larger adjustments when they did change prices. In particular, before the pandemic, the median price lasted more than 10 months, but by early 2022, the median price was lasting less than 5 months. Encouragingly, the frequency of price adjustment has declined since then, with median price duration moving up to nearly 7 months in the third quarter of last year.5I am looking for a return to pre-pandemic price adjustment patterns in the services industries as cost pressures ease and as the FOMC's actions to support a return to price stability continue to affect consumer and firm behavior. There are some signs that businesses may be more wary of the response by consumers to higher prices and may already be responding by raising prices less frequently. For example, mentions of consumer "price sensitivity" have become more common in the Fed's recent Beige Book, which reports economic conditions across our 12 Districts from various market participants. The third factor favoring continued disinflation—one that is related to the other two factors I have just mentioned—is the stability of inflation expectations. Inflation expectations can feed into wage demands and negotiations as well as into price-setting decisions. To understand why this matters going forward, I will first look back: Over the past couple of years, some workers have demanded large pay increases to catch up with higher-than-normal growth in the cost of living resulting from various pandemic-related shocks. Some of these wage gains, in turn, likely passed through to higher prices as part of firms' frequent price adjustments. If expectations for future inflation had become unanchored or persistently higher, then workers might have continued to demand higher-than-normal wage increases going forward, and firms might have continued to pass on these costs to consumers.6But inflation expectations have stayed reasonably well anchored. As inflation expectations stay anchored and in tune with inflation slowing further in the future, employees—many of whose wages have recently been rising faster than price inflation—are less likely to continue demanding very large wage and salary increases.7Similarly, as businesses expect the prices of labor and other inputs to rise more slowly (or, for some inputs, even to fall), they will be less likely to plan to significantly increase their own prices throughout the year, which in turn helps reduce inflation. Survey data from the Richmond Fed show a close relationship between firms' expectations for overall price inflation and those firms' own price-setting plans. In particular, as inflation comes down, firms become less reactive, and inflation expectations play less of a role in firms' price adjustments.8 Several data sources support the idea that expectations are indeed well anchored. One closely watched source is the Michigan survey, in which expectations for inflation during the next 5 to 10 years have remained fairly flat recently, near levels seen for much of the past decade. And expectations for inflation in the year ahead have come down a fair bit after peaking in 2022. Expected inflation in the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations shows a similar pattern, with both one-year and three-year expectations close to their pre-pandemic norms. Expectations also appear well anchored in surveys of forecasters and in market-based measures of future inflation. This information suggests that firms, workers, and investors understand that price- and wage-setting behaviors are likely to return to pre-pandemic norms, which will help us return to the price stability we enjoyed before the pandemic. I have noted three reasons I expect continued progress toward the FOMC's 2 percent target for inflation, and I believe monetary policy has played a key role in driving these factors. An open question looking ahead, though, is how spending momentum will evolve this year, which may either help or hinder this disinflationary process. I expect consumer spending to grow more slowly this year than last—which should help with disinflation. Large balances of excess savings accumulated early in the pandemic have supported household spending during the past few years. By now, these excess savings are likely exhausted, at least for households in the bottom half of the income distribution. And we have begun to see signs that some households have come under increased stress, such as rising delinquency rates on credit cards.9Just two days ago, the Federal Reserve released the January survey of senior loan officers (or SLOOS). That survey showed continued tightening of credit card lending standards, the latest in a string of such surveys documenting tighter conditions for a variety of consumer lending. These signs of tight financial conditions point to slower consumer spending. Business spending growth is also likely to be a bit slower this year, since the widely discussed boom in factory construction may level off, albeit at a high level. Eventually, equipment investment should rise to fill those newly built factories with machines, but that process will likely be gradual. And I closely watch developments in broader financial markets as well. Some measures of financial conditions have become a bit less restrictive in recent months but remain relatively tight. Indeed, the FCI-G, a measure of financial conditions published by the Board, and other indicators suggest that overall financial conditions are consistent with continued progress on our inflation mandate. So I am pleased with the disinflationary progress thus far and expect it to continue. I must emphasize, however, that the Committee's job is not done yet. Consumer spending was surprisingly strong last year. Gross domestic product (GDP) grew at a nearly 5 percent rate in the third quarter, led by consumption. And even though spending and output growth moderated some in the fourth quarter, consumption contributed nearly 2 percentage points to fourth-quarter GDP growth. So consumers could surprise us again this year, and that could slow progress on inflation. Last week's employment report was also surprisingly strong amidst the broader cooling trend. It is important that supply and demand in both product and labor markets broadly continue moving into better balance. I am also paying close attention to the upside risks to inflation posed by geopolitical developments. Russia's ongoing war on Ukraine and the widening of the conflict in the Middle East could contribute to higher commodity prices and disrupt global trade, in turn pushing up goods inflation in the U.S. When I worked at the World Bank, I followed these issues on international supply chains and commodity prices closely, and I certainly continue to do so now. I will remain focused on the inflation side of our dual mandate until I am confident that inflation is returning durably to our 2 percent target. I am keenly aware that high inflation vastly complicates business decision making and importantly creates serious hardships for our most vulnerable households and individuals. Having lived in Colombia during periods of high and volatile inflation, I know firsthand how destructive it can be. It is critical that inflation returns to 2 percent, as that is indeed the pace the Committee has deemed to be consistent with price stability. Of course, I am mindful of our employment mandate, and I am closely tracking labor market developments. While historically we have sometimes seen a tradeoff between inflation and employment, the recent experience of disinflation has been sustained without a significant increase in unemployment. I do expect job growth to continue; however, history has shown that labor market conditions can change quickly, sometimes before we see strong signals in spending data. Thus, I am watching closely the totality of the data, with risks on both sides of the mandate in mind. I am also cognizant of international risks to our employment mandate. For example, a broader slowdown in Europe or China—two of the engines of global growth—could become a drag on the U.S. economy. For now, I see the risks to our dual mandate as roughly balanced; our policy stance is restrictive, but the target range for the federal funds rate has been steady for some time now, and the most recent Summary of Economic Projections by FOMC participants suggests that the rate is at its peak level, if the economy evolves as expected. At some point, the continued cooling of inflation and labor markets may make it appropriate to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. On the other hand, if progress on disinflation stalls, it may be appropriate to hold the target range steady at its current level for longer to ensure continued progress on our dual mandate. In summary, I am pleased by the progress on inflation, and optimistic it will continue, but I will be watching the economic data closely to verify the continuation of this progress. This approach is the surest path to achieving and maintaining both of the FOMC's economic objectives and promoting an economy that benefits everyone in America. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Hiring plans in the National Federation of Independent Business survey have cooled significantly from their peak in mid-2021. Cooling of hiring plans is also evident in the January Beige Book.Return to text 3. These shares refer to the share of workers who are foreign born, averaged over 2015-2023. Data from Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey.Return to text 4. See Bureau of Economic Analysis (2022), "Composition of Gross Output by Industry" tables.Return to text 5. Updated data from Hugh Montag and Daniel Villar (2023), "Price-Setting during the Covid Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 29). The authors also find that the likelihood of upward (versus downward) price adjustments was higher in the pandemic episode than in previous years, another important component of the inflation story.Return to text 6. For a helpful discussion of this potential "wage–price spiral," see Guido Lorenzoni and Ivan Werning (2023), "Wage–Price Spirals," paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 28–29, https://bpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/voices.uchicago.edu/dist/c/3483/files/2023/10/5_Lorenzoni-Werning_unembargoed.pdf.Return to text 7. Real wages—that is, wages adjusted for price inflation—declined earlier in the recent inflationary episode. But real wages have been recovering more recently.Return to text 8. See Felipe F. Schwartzman and Sonya Ravindranath Waddell (2024), "Inflation Expectations and Price Setting among Fifth District Firms," Economic Brief 24-03 (Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, January).Return to text 9. Rising credit card delinquency rates can be seen, for example, in quarterly "call reports" data from the Federal Reserve, which currently extend through the third quarter of 2023.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Finding Forward Speaker Series, University of St. Thomas, Opus College of Business, Minneapolis, MN Thank you, Dean Dunham and the University of St. Thomas for the opportunity to speak to you today.1Given that this event is co-sponsored by the Notre Dame Club of Minnesota, and I taught at Notre Dame for 13 years, I will lead off with this thought: Go Irish! When I last spoke on January 16, the data we had received up to that point was very good—three- and six-month measures of core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation were running right at 2 percent, which is our goal for total inflation, the labor market was cooling but still healthy, and real gross domestic product (GDP) was likewise growing but expected to moderate in the fourth quarter. I argued then that the data was "almost as good as it gets." And I argued that because the economy was doing so well, we could take our time and collect more data to ensure that inflation was on a sustainable 2 percent path. There was no rush to cut rates any time soon. Since then, we received data on fourth quarter GDP as well as January data on job growth and consumer product index (CPI) inflation. All three reports came in hotter than expected. GDP growth came in at 3.3 percent, well above forecasts. Jobs grew by 353,000, well over forecasts of less than 200,000, and monthly core CPI inflation came in at 0.4 percent, which was much higher than it had been for the previous six months. So, the data that we have received since my last speech has reinforced my view that we need to verify that the progress on inflation we saw in the last half of 2023 will continue and this means there is no rush to begin cutting interest rates to normalize monetary policy. Last week's report on consumer prices in January was a reminder that ongoing progress on inflation is not assured. The uptick in inflation in that report was spread widely among goods and services. This one month of data may have been driven by some odd seasonal factors or outsized increases in housing costs, or it may be a signal that inflation is stickier than we thought and will be harder to bring back down to our target. We just don't know yet. While I believe inflation is likely on track to reach 2 percent in a sustainable manner, I am going to need to see more data to sort out whether January's CPI inflation was more noise than signal. This means waiting longer before I have enough confidence that beginning to cut rates will keep us on a path to 2 percent inflation. Fortunately, the strength of output and employment growth means that there is no great urgency in easing policy, which I still expect we will do this year. More data, and more time, will tell whether January's CPI report was just a bump in the road to 2 percent inflation. The hotter-than-expected data that we received validates the careful risk management approach that Chair Powell has advocated in his recent public appearances. And, with most data indicating solid economic fundamentals, the risk of waiting a little longer to ease policy is lower than the risk of acting too soon and possibly halting or reversing the progress we've made on inflation. Let me start with the outlook for economic activity, including what we have learned from the latest data. As I mentioned, real GDP grew strongly in the second half of 2023 and that momentum has led forecasters to predict continued solid growth in the first months of 2024. After expanding at a 4.9 percent pace in the third quarter last year and at a 3.3 percent clip in the fourth quarter, estimates for the first quarter of 2024 range from 1.7 percent for the Blue Chip average of private sector forecasters to 2.9 percent for the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow model, which is based on the data in hand. Among that recent data is the Institute for Supply Management's January survey of purchasing managers. For non-manufacturing businesses, the index increased to a level consistent with moderate growth. Meanwhile, the manufacturing index, while still contractionary, rose to its highest level since October 2022, with rising orders and production, continued improvement in delivery times, and inventory positions among customers all pointing to favorable growth in demand. While the balance of the evidence is that growth has continued at a moderate rate, several indicators suggest some slowing. Retail sales fell 0.8 percent in January, after rising 0.4 percent in December. While some of this drop is likely due to bad weather and technical issues related to seasonal adjustment, it was a surprise. It may indicate that consumer spending which ran higher than I expected in the second half of 2023 is finally showing the effects of higher interest rates and a depletion of excess savings. I will be watching to see whether spending stays robust. A positive sign is that consumer confidence has continued to rise. One reason for that might be the labor market, whose surprising strength continued in January. As I mentioned, the U.S. economy created 353,000 jobs in January, and 333,000 in December, well above the 255,000 a month average in 2023 and also well above what most estimate to be consistent with population growth. Job growth in January was widespread across different sectors of the economy. There were job increases in three large sectors that have faced sharp labor shortages: health care and social assistance, leisure and hospitality, and state and local government. But there were also significant job increases in parts of the economy that tend to rise and fall with changes in the pace of economic activity—manufacturing, construction, retail trade and professional business services. The gains in manufacturing and professional services were at or near the highest posted in the previous 12 months. Unemployment was steady at 3.7 percent, nearly as low as it has been in 50 years. And while there were signs of slackening demand for labor over the course of 2023, those signs haven't been so clear recently. The 12-month growth rate in average hourly earnings fell from 4.7 percent in July to 4.3 percent in December and then rose to 4.5 percent in January. I have been focused on the number of job openings for the past two years as an indicator of labor demand. Job openings fell from 12 million in April 2022 to 9 million in December 2023. We won't get data on job openings in January for a couple of weeks, but openings unexpectedly ticked up in December, and the rate of people quitting their jobs held steady, both indications that moderation in the labor market may have stalled. One data point does not make a trend, and these strong job reports come after a year of more or less steady loosening in the labor market, with supply increasing relative to demand. But it does tend to support the idea of continued moderate growth in economic activity. I will be looking for signs of continued loosening in the labor market, which by most measures is still considerably tighter than it was before the pandemic. Everything about the outlook that I have mentioned so far is important for what it tells us about continued progress toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation goal. Last week's high reading on CPI inflation may just be a bump in the road, but it also may be a warning that the considerable progress on inflation over the past year may be stalling. While 12-month CPI inflation improved a bit to 3.1 percent, it was higher than expected, as was the 3.9 percent rise in core inflation that excludes volatile food and energy prices. Both the three-month and six-month changes in core CPI increased in January. The FOMC's preferred inflation gauge, based on personal consumption expenditures, isn't out yet for January, but an estimate factoring in producer prices is that core PCE inflation rose to a 12-month rate of 2.8 percent, and three- and six- month rates rose to 2.4 percent and 2.5 percent respectively. While this uptick isn't a welcome development, let's take a deep breath and put it into perspective. A year ago, core CPI inflation was 6.4 percent and core PCE inflation was 4.9 percent. Inflation has fallen by more than half since then, and the progress continued all the way through December. Also, there was good news in the annual seasonal adjustment factors this month to the past year of inflation data. In early 2023, these revisions had revealed that inflation in 2022 was a lot worse than initial estimates, and I was worried this would happen again this year. But the revisions on February 9 did not change the picture of a dramatic improvement in inflation in 2023. It is comforting to know that the progress we made was real and not a mirage. In judging whether January inflation was noise or a sign of slowing progress, one thing I will be looking at are measures of wages and compensation. I mentioned the increase in average hourly earnings last month. It is true that there was some moderation in average wages over the second half of last year, but I still consider them to be somewhat elevated to achieve our 2 percent goal. Other measures of compensation show slow but continuing progress toward that target. The Bureau of Labor Statistics' quarterly Employment Cost Index showed moderation in both salaries and bonuses in the final three months of 2023. And the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker continued its very gradual decline in January. Payroll costs are the largest expense for most businesses, and I will be watching to see whether wages and other compensation continue to moderate or if they become a factor preventing progress toward our inflation goal. While I focus on the overall inflation numbers, it is still useful to look how the different components of inflation have moved. A big factor in the improvement of inflation over the past year has come from goods prices which fell during 2023. Goods prices represent almost 25 percent of core CPI inflation. Even at times of very low inflation, goods deflation is modest in a growing economy, so one question is whether this contribution to progress on inflation will continue. Another big contributor to CPI inflation is the cost of housing services, which measures the estimated costs of renting or the equivalent for owning a home. Housing cost inflation represents about 45 percent of core CPI inflation. There was a fairly steady moderation in housing services inflation in 2023, as the slowing in market rent increases since 2022 began to gradually show through to the housing services price index. But we saw an unexpected jump in housing services inflation in the January CPI data. I plan to be watching to see if housing costs continue to run at a higher rate than expected. The remaining component of core CPI inflation is services excluding housing. This category is about 30 percent of the index. Inflation in this category moderated over the course of 2023 but in January there was a broad-based increase. Since business services are heavily reliant on labor input, this segment of prices is naturally significantly influenced by labor compensation, such as wages and benefits. So, one question is whether relatively elevated labor costs prevent moderation in this large component of inflation. As I consider all these aspects of inflation, I have to say that I see predominately upside risks to my general expectation that inflation will continue to move toward the FOMC's 2 percent goal. On the flip side, I see little reason to expect that inflation will run below 2 percent for an extended period given the strong economic fundamentals we are observing in GDP and employment. For these reasons, I am going to need to see a couple more months of inflation data to be sure that January was a fluke and that we are still on track to price stability. This brings me to the implications of this outlook for monetary policy. Let me pause here and say that typically the FOMC considers easing policy only when there are fairly clear signs that the economy could be in or close to a recession. But, based on the picture of the economy that I have painted today, it should be as clear to you as it is to me that there are no indications of an imminent recession. By that I don't mean that the picture of the economy is crystal clear. Sifting through the data, I see evidence of ongoing robust growth in output and employment, but also some signs that growth may be slowing. One thing that is clear is that by many metrics, the U.S. economy is healthy and well positioned to continue growing and adding jobs. This is a good outcome, and our job is not to stop it but rather to ensure that economic fundamentals grow in a manner consistent with inflation at 2 percent. That makes the decision to be patient on beginning to ease policy simpler than it might be. I am going to need to see at least another couple more months of inflation data before I can judge whether January was a speed bump or a pothole. I will be watching wages and compensation, and the components of inflation that I outlined today to see whether broad progress on inflation continues or stalls. I will also be monitoring economic activity and employment, attentive as always to any unexpected warning signs of a recession, but also paying close attention to whether growth in each is consistent with continued progress toward 2 percent inflation. I still expect it will be appropriate sometime this year to begin easing monetary policy, but the start of policy easing and number of rate cuts will depend on the incoming data. I likewise don't know whether the economy and employment will continue to barrel ahead, or whether both will slow in a manner that I expect will support progress toward 2 percent inflation. But the upshot is that I believe the Committee can wait a little longer to ease monetary policy. Commentators often argue that by delaying rate cuts for a meeting or two we run the risk of having overtight policy that can cause a recession in the near term. While I find this narrative to be interesting, I also find it to be somewhat puzzling. The reason is as follows. When rates are going up, most of the discussion is on the long and variable lags of monetary policy with rate hikes not having a serious impact on the economy for 18 months or more. But when it comes to delaying rate cuts for a short period of time, we supposedly risk suddenly driving the economy into a recession. This supposed asymmetry in the lagged effects of rate hikes versus rate cuts is puzzling and not supported by any economic model I am aware of. How do we square the circle on this narrative? I think the explanation is that, as I noted earlier, rate cuts tend to occur after major economic shocks that cause, or threaten to cause, a recession. Historically, large and rapid rate cuts are highly correlated with recessions, and this leads to the inference that policy was too tight and actually caused a recession. But it is very difficult to untangle the effects of tight monetary policy from a major economic shock when looking at past U.S. recessions. We do not have the counterfactual of what impact delayed rate cuts would have had on the economy in the absence of the economic shock. My conjecture is that, in the absence of a major economic shock, delaying rate cuts by a few months should not have a substantial impact on the real economy in the near term. And, I think I have shown that acting too soon could squander our progress in inflation and risk considerable harm to the economy. In conclusion, the strength of the economy and the recent data we have received on inflation mean it is appropriate to be patient, careful, methodical, deliberative – pick your favorite synonym. Whatever word you pick, they all translate to one idea: What's the rush? 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text