Federal bank regulatory agencies will hold a virtual public outreach meeting on September 25, 2024, as part of their review of regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA). EGRPRA requires the agencies, with input from the public, to review their regulations at least once every 10 years to identify any outdated or otherwise unnecessary regulatory requirements applicable to their supervised institutions. The outreach meeting is an opportunity for interested stakeholders to present their views on the six categories of regulations listed in the first twoFederal Register notices: applications and reporting; powers and activities; international operations; consumer protection; directors, officers and employees; and money laundering. Individuals interested in providing oral comments mustregisterby August 9, 2024, and indicate the regulatory category they would like to discuss. The agencies will notify those individuals selected to provide comments within one month of registration closing. Advance registration is not required to attend this virtual public meeting as an observer. The agencies will announce additional public meetings in 2024 and 2025. Details will be available on theEGRPRA website.
Five federal regulatory agencies today issued final guidance addressing reconsiderations of value (ROVs) for residential real estate transactions. The guidance advises on policies and procedures that financial institutions may implement to allow consumers to provide financial institutions with information that may not have been considered during an appraisal or if deficiencies are identified in the original appraisal. ROVs are requests from a financial institution to an appraiser or other preparer of a valuation report to reassess the value of residential real estate. Deficiencies identified in valuations, either through an institution's valuation review processes or through consumer-provided information, may be a basis for financial institutions to question the credibility of the appraisal or valuation report. The guidance offers examples of ROV policies and procedures that a financial institution may implement to help institutions identify, address, and mitigate discrimination risk; describes the risks of deficient residential real estate valuations; and explains how financial institutions may incorporate ROV processes into risk management functions. The agencies finalized the guidance largely as proposed, with the addition of clarifying edits based on public comments received on the proposed guidance published in July 2023. Federal Registernotice: Interagency Guidance on Reconsiderations of Value of Residential Real Estate Valuations (PDF) Board Memo: Interagency Guidance on Reconsiderations of Value of Residential Real Estate Valuations (PDF)
Six federal regulatory agencies today issued a final rule, pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, designed to help ensure the credibility and integrity of models used in valuations for certain mortgages secured by a consumer's principal dwelling. In particular, the rule will implement quality control standards for automated valuation models (AVMs) used by mortgage originators and secondary market issuers in valuing those homes. The final rule is substantially similar to theproposalissued in June 2023. Under the final rule, the agencies will require institutions that engage in certain transactions secured by a consumer's principal dwelling to adopt policies, practices, procedures, and control systems designed to: Driven in part by advances in database and modeling technology and the availability of larger property datasets, AVMs are being used with increasing frequency as part of the real estate valuation process. While advances in AVM technology and data availability have the potential to reduce costs and turnaround times of the property valuation process, it is important that institutions using AVMs take appropriate steps to ensure the credibility and integrity of the valuations produced. It is also important that the AVMs institutions use adhere to quality control standards designed to comply with applicable nondiscrimination laws. The final rule will become effective on the first day of the calendar quarter following 12 months after publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Quality Control Standards for Automated Valuation Models Board Memo: Final rule to implement quality control standards for the use of automated valuation models (PDF)
Federal bank regulatory agencies today released the 2024 list of distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies where certain bank activities are eligible for Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) credit. Under the CRA, the agencies assess a bank's record of meeting the credit needs of its entire community, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safe and sound operations. The list released by the agencies includes distressed or underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income geographies where revitalization or stabilization activities are eligible to receive CRA consideration. The designations reflect local economic conditions, including unemployment, poverty, and population changes. Previous years' lists and criteria for designating these areas are availablehere. Revitalization or stabilization activities in these geographies are eligible to receive CRA consideration under the community development definition for 12 months after publication of the current list. As with past lists, the agencies apply a one-year lag period for geographies that were included in 2023 but are no longer designated as distressed or underserved in the current list. 2024 List of Distressed or Underserved Nonmetropolitan Middle-Income Geographies (PDF) Source Information and Methodology (PDF)
The federal bank regulatory agencies today issued a statement reminding banks of potential risks associated with third-party arrangements to deliver bank deposit products and services. The agencies support responsible innovation and banks engaging in these arrangements in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with applicable law. While these arrangements can provide benefits, supervisory experience has identified a range of safety and soundness, compliance, and consumer-related concerns with the management of these arrangements. The statement details the potential risks and provides examples of effective risk management practices for these arrangements. In addition, the statement reminds banks of relevant existing legal requirements, guidance, and related resources, and provides insights that the agencies have gained through their supervision. The statement does not establish new supervisory expectations. Separately, the agencies have requested additional information on a broad range of bank-fintech arrangements, including with respect to deposit, payments, and lending products and services. The agencies are seeking input on the nature and implications of bank-fintech arrangements and effective risk management practices. The agencies are considering whether additional steps could help ensure banks effectively manage risks associated with these various types of arrangements. Joint Statement on Banks’ Arrangements with Third Parties to Deliver Bank Deposit Products and Services (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Request for Information on Bank-Fintech Arrangements Involving Banking Products and Services Distributed to Consumers and Businesses Comments:Submit|View Board memo: Request for Information on Bank-Fintech Arrangements Involving Banking Products and Services Distributed to Consumers and Businesses (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
Four federal financial institution regulatory agencies today requested comment on a proposal to update their requirements for supervised institutions to establish, implement, and maintain effective, risk-based, and reasonably designed anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) programs. The amendments are intended to align with changes concurrently proposed by the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), most of which result from the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020 (AML Act). The proposed amendments would require supervised institutions to identify, evaluate, and document the regulated institution's money laundering, terrorist financing, and other illicit finance activity risks, as well as consider, as appropriate, FinCEN's published national AML/CFT priorities. Additionally, and consistent with the AML Act, the proposal would mandate that the duty to establish, maintain, and enforce the AML/CFT program remain the responsibility of, and be performed by, persons in the United States who are accessible to, and subject to the oversight and supervision by, the relevant agency. The proposal also supports institutions' consideration of innovative approaches to meet compliance obligations. Comments on the proposal are due 60 days after the date of publication in theFederal Register. Federal Registernotice: Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Program Requirements Comments:Submit|View Interagency Statement on the Issuance of the AML/CFT Program Notices of Proposed Rulemaking (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Australian Conference of Economists 2024, Adelaide, Australia Thank you, Jacky. I am happy to be here in Adelaide and appreciate the opportunity to speak with all of you.1Considering the significant developments in the global economy over the past few years, now is an appropriate time to reflect on the economic reverberations the COVID-19 shock caused around the world. Examining the common inflation experiences and monetary policy challenges across several countries, including Australia and the United States, is a helpful exercise for policymakers and economists alike. Today, I will first talk about how monetary policymakers responded in similar fashion to the COVID-19 pandemic and, later, to high inflation during the recovery. I will discuss common features of the recent inflation experience across countries and the importance of global shocks. With disinflation in train across most countries, I will consider what we can learn from past cycles of monetary easing. I will finish with a discussion of how the use of alternative scenarios could help monetary policymakers communicate how they might respond to a range of possible economic outcomes. Common Monetary Policy Response to the PandemicIn the spring of 2020, economies around the world shut down or sharply limited business activity, especially for in-person services, including dining out and traveling. Governments introduced extraordinary fiscal support aimed at alleviating the socioeconomic effects of the pandemic. And, to prevent sharp financial and economic deterioration, most central banks responded aggressively by lowering policy rates, ramping up asset purchases, and taking other actions to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. Those efforts were sustained throughout 2020 and much of 2021, as the initial turmoil in financial markets subsided but the health situation remained uncertain. Advanced economy central banks that had positive policy rates before the pandemic, including the Fed and the central banks of Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom, cut these rates to near zero, as shown infigure 1.Central banks that entered the pandemic with policy rates already at zero, such as Sweden, or negative—including the euro area, Japan, and Switzerland—left their rates unchanged. Meanwhile, almost all emerging market economy (EME) central banks cut their policy rates. Although central banks acted quickly to reduce rates, policymakers cited a few reasons to refrain from deeper cuts: Among EME policymakers, concerns were expressed that further lowering rates risked exacerbating capital outflows, while some advanced economy central banks commented that further rate cuts, particularly in negative territory, could harm banks' financial health or would provide little additional monetary stimulus. Many central banks also conducted significant asset purchases. These purchases were initially aimed at restoring market functioning and providing liquidity, but they also were seen as lowering long-term yields and easing broader financial conditions. The Fed and the Bank of England (BOE) restarted their purchases, while the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swedish Riksbank increased the pace of their existing programs. And here, the Reserve Bank of Australia began asset purchases and introduced a target for the three-year government bond yield at the same level as its overnight rate. The Rise of Inflation and the Common Monetary Policy ResponseOver the course of 2021, as financial conditions improved, a strong recovery in consumer demand outpaced still constrained supply capacity in many countries, leading to production and transportation bottlenecks, which ultimately resulted in inflation. The surge in inflation was initially mostly concentrated in finished goods and commodities but later spread to services.2As the economy started reopening with the lifting of lockdowns and rollout of vaccines, demand for services picked up. Similar to what played out with goods, the pickup in demand for services ran into a constrained supply of service workers. As services are more labor intensive than goods, and labor supply was still reeling from the consequences of the pandemic, the rebalancing of consumption from goods to services led to higher rates of inflation and nominal wage growth. In response to rising inflation, central banks around the world started to remove some of the support that they provided during the height of the pandemic. As a first step, central banks let many of the emergency support programs—in which they had bought assets other than national government bonds—expire. Next, central banks generally began to taper their purchases of government securities and then to end net purchases late in 2021 or the first half of 2022. Then some central banks began to raise interest rates. The first to do so were EME central banks that saw particularly sharp increases in inflation driven by exchange rate depreciation and by the surge in prices for food, which makes up a large part of the consumption baskets in their economies. Advanced economy central banks generally were more patient on raising interest rates in 2021, as inflation expectations in their economies were better anchored than in emerging economies. Among advanced economy central banks, the first to hike in the autumn of 2021 were central banks in Norway and New Zealand, whose economies had strong recoveries. The BOE first raised its policy rate in December 2021, citing a strong labor market and sharply rising inflation. The Bank of Canada and the Fed began to raise rates in March 2022, and the ECB first raised its deposit rate (from negative 0.5 percent to zero) in July 2022. Most advanced economy central banks undertook a sequence of policy actions in which they first began to raise their policy rates and later began to reduce the size of their balance sheets over time. Understanding the Rise and Fall of Inflation in Recent YearsThe inflation surge in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic was synchronized across advanced and emerging economies, asfigure 2illustrates. The rapid increase in prices reflected an upswing in demand for goods, strained supply chains, tight labor markets, and sharp hikes in commodity prices exacerbated by Russia's February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. The run-up was not only for overall headline inflation, but also for its core components. A plethora of factors can explain the global co-movement in headline and core inflation. First, fluctuations in global food and energy prices broadly pass through to consumer prices in individual countries. But there are other possible explanations, including global supply constraints and synchronous policy responses. The pandemic experience was also a stark reminder of the importance of international trade and input-output linkages for the propagation of supply shocks—for example, production and shipping disruptions in the semiconductor industry in Asia constraining production and creating important price pressures in downstream markets, such as motor vehicles in the U.S. Research on the recent inflation episode is still very much in its infancy, and I look forward to learning from the ongoing work on the subject. One important contribution already is Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard's analysis of pandemic-era inflation in 11 economies. Separate teams for each of the 11 economies estimated a comparable model of inflation and its drivers. They find for the U.S. and, with some variation, for other countries that "relative price shocks and sectoral shortages drove the initial surge in inflation, but as these effects have reversed, tight labor markets in most (although not all) countries have become a relatively more important factor."3 In a recent FEDS Notes article, economists at the Federal Reserve Board took head-on the task of decomposing world inflation into common and country-specific components and using this decomposition to analyze the sources of inflation around the world.4Despite the different approach, they reached conclusions broadly in line with those of Bernanke and Blanchard. As shown infigure 3, they find that the global components of inflation accounted for a large part of the variation in the average inflation around the world during the post-COVID period. This is an experience with precedents during the oil price shocks of the 1970s and the 1980s. This study also found that the global components of inflation also predict the path of near-term inflation. Historically, once global components start moving, they maintain the course and take time to reverse. This persistence and the recent decline in global components of core and noncore inflation suggest that the world disinflationary process will continue, as shown infigure 4. The predicted path is in line with a gradual return of inflation toward central bank targets. Of note, as shown infigure 5, the authors find that the post-pandemic rise in global inflation was linked to both commodity-driven price shocks and shocks to global economic activity—such as the sharp decline and rebound in activity due to the COVID‑19 pandemic and the associated labor market shortages. This situation contrasts with the 1970s and 1980s, when commodity price shocks played a prominent role in inflation's fluctuations. Additionally, idiosyncratic shocks were important drivers of the surge in global inflation in 2022 and its decline in 2023. These shocks may capture economy-specific forces, including natural gas disruptions that more greatly affected European economies than others in the aftermath of Russia's war on Ukraine. In sum, through the lens of the model, the ongoing disinflation is driven by waning effects of commodity price shocks and by a gradual normalization of global economic activity, amid the resolution of shortages and imbalances in labor markets. Current Common Monetary Policy ChallengesWith global components of inflation turning down, most countries have experienced a significant fall in inflation relative to its peak. Similarly, most central banks stopped raising their policy rates over the past year. Some are considering how long to keep rates at restrictive levels or, if inflation picks up again, whether to raise rates further. The Bank of Canada, the ECB, the Swedish Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank, have begun to cut policy rates, highlighting progress toward meeting inflation goals amid sustained softness in economic activity. Indeed, unlike in the U.S., the level of gross domestic product (GDP) in some advanced economies remains well below what would be implied by their respective pre-COVID GDP trends.5Even among those cutting rates, however, the future path of the policy rate is generally seen as dependent on a continuing decline of inflation toward target levels. For all central banks, the question is how best to ensure continued disinflation while avoiding unnecessary damage to the economy. The generally desired outcome is a soft landing, in which inflation returns to the central bank's target inflation level or range without inducing a recession or a large increase in unemployment. How likely is such a scenario? It may be too soon to definitively say for the current economic cycle. But Fed Board staff have examined past episodes of monetary policy easing in 13 advanced economies over the past five decades. They find that soft landings are rare, according to their analysis published in another recent FEDS Notes article.6In most of the cases that they studied, central banks were not successful in bringing inflation back to near target in a timely manner. And when they were successful in taming inflation, it often was associated with a recession. However, soft landings are not unprecedented. When such a landing occurred, on average it was associated with a smaller preceding policy tightening. Soft landings were also more likely when policy easing began with inflation already close to target and when there was a relatively firm growth backdrop. In the U.S., what I have seen so far appears to be consistent with a soft landing: Inflation has fallen significantly from its peak, and the labor market has gradually cooled but remains strong. Of course, I am closely monitoring incoming data to see how the economy further develops. It is possible that some features of the recent inflation episode may make a soft landing more likely in countries around the globe. As I discussed, Bernanke and Blanchard found that much of the inflation episode came from relative price shocks and sectoral shortages that have since been resolved. And while they found that tight labor markets have since taken over as the main drivers of inflation, there are signs that such tightness is easing. For instance, in the U.S., the ratio of vacancies to unemployment has fallen back to its pre-pandemic level and the rate of voluntary quits has declined, as workers are less confident of finding a better job. Thus, my baseline forecast (and that of many outside observers) is that inflation will continue to move toward target over time, without much further rise in unemployment. Monetary Policy CommunicationsOf course, forecasts are subject to considerable uncertainty, and policymakers must consider a range of possible outcomes. A key challenge of monetary policy communications is discussing how policy would respond to changes in the economic outlook. Central bankers are faced with a tradeoff between predictability and flexibility. On the one hand, many observers would like to know in advance what the path for the policy rate will be, while, on the other hand, a central bank needs to remain nimble and data dependent. As a result, central bankers often try to convey their "reaction function" so observers understand how policy might adapt to incoming data and the implications for the economic outlook. In his recent review of forecasting for monetary policymaking and communications at the BOE, Ben Bernanke suggested that the Bank consider supplementing its published forecasts with the use of alternative scenarios to help the public understand its policy reaction function.7For similar reasons I try to incorporate a discussion of alternative scenarios in my own speeches. Fed policymakers, like those at many other central banks, also benefit from staff analysis using models to explore how the forecast would change relative to the baseline if certain assumptions are changed. The challenge is how to use such alternative scenarios in our official communications. Policy communications are an area where we can learn a lot from what other central banks have done, and communication practices have developed over time. The BOE was an early innovator with its fan charts, which emphasized that its forecasts for GDP and inflation were subject to growing uncertainty the longer the time horizon. Of course, forecasts for economic variables need to be conditioned on some assumption of the path of policy rates. While early practice was to condition on unchanged rates or on the path of rates implied by market pricing, some central banks innovated by publishing their own forecasts for policy rates. This was originally done by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and later by the Norges Bank and the Riksbank. Since 2012, the Federal Reserve's Summary of Economic Projections also includes the path of the policy rate that each policymaker "deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability."8I continue to take great interest in communications and other monetary policy practices by foreign central banks. In conclusion, I think it is clear we have learned much from the experience of the past few years. I must stress that the human toll of the pandemic cannot and should not be overlooked. Purely in terms of economics, the recent period does stand out as an unusual case study. Economies around the world effectively faced the same shock at nearly the same moment. We were then able to observe how various economies around the world responded to the shock, including the actions of central banks and fiscal policymakers. I am glad to have highlighted some of the interesting research that has begun to explore this space, and I am sure much more study on this unique time in our history will soon occur, and that can be powerful. What is not unique to the pandemic is that we often have common macroeconomic experiences and face common monetary policy challenges, which is what makes discussions like the one today so valuable. Thank you. It is a pleasure to be here in Adelaide. I look forward to continuing our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See François de Soyres, Alexandre Gaillard, Ana Maria Santacreu, and Dylan Moore (2024), "Supply Disruptions and Fiscal Stimulus: Transmission through Global Value Chains,"AEA Papers and Proceedings,vol. 114 (May), pp. 112–17.Return to text 3. See Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard (2024), "An Analysis of Pandemic-Era Inflation in 11 Economies (PDF)," Hutchins Center Working Paper 91 (Washington: Brookings Institution, May), quoted text on p. 1.Return to text 4. See Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia, Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Michele Modugno (2024), "Lessons from the Co-Movement of Inflation around the World," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 28).Return to text 5. See François de Soyres, Joaquin Garcia-Cabo Herrero, Nils Goernemann, Sharon Jeon, Grace Lofstrom, and Dylan Moore (2024), "Why Is the U.S. GDP Recovering Faster Than Other Advanced Economies?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 17).Return to text 6. See François de Soyres and Zina Saijid (2024), "Lessons from Past Monetary Easing Cycles," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 31).Return to text 7. See Ben S. Bernanke (2024),Forecasting for Monetary Policy Making and Communication at the Bank of England: A Review(London: Bank of England, April).Return to text 8. See the June 2024 Summary of Economic Projections (quoted text on p. 1), available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20240612.pdf.Return to text Accessible Version
The federal bank regulatory agencies today announced their second notice requesting comment to reduce regulatory burden. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 requires the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council and federal bank regulatory agencies to review their regulations every 10 years to identify outdated or otherwise unnecessary regulatory requirements for their supervised institutions. To facilitate this review, the agencies divided their regulations into 12 categories and are now soliciting comments on their regulations in three categories: Consumer Protection; Directors, Officers, and Employees; and Money Laundering. The public has 90 days from publication in theFederal Registerto comment on the relevant regulations. Over the next two years, the agencies will request comment on regulations in the remaining categories, asking the public to identify the regulations they believe are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. The agencies will hold a series of outreach meetings where interested parties may comment on applicable regulatory requirements directly to the agencies. Information about the outreach meetings will be publicized as details are finalized. Federal Registernotice: Regulatory Publication and Review Under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (PDF) Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act website Board Votes
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by A.N.B. Holding Company, Ltd., of Terrell, Texas, to acquire The ANB Corporation, and thereby indirectly acquire The American National Bank of Texas, both of Terrell, Texas. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by Resona Bank, Limited, of Osaka, Japan, to establish a representative office in Los Angeles, California. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the termination of an enforcement action with Silvergate Bank and its holding company, Silvergate Capital Corporation, both of La Jolla, California. The Board's enforcement action, which has been in effect since May 2023, ensured that Silvergate would liquidate and wind down operations in a manner that protected the bank's depositors. Since that time, Silvergate has completed its liquidation and wind-down plan, has paid back all deposits to its customers, and no longer functions as a bank. Earlier this year, the Boardseparately finedSilvergate $43 million for noncompliance with anti-money laundering laws. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday fined Citigroup $60.6 million for violating the Board's 2020 enforcement action. Citigroup has made insufficient progress remediating its problems with data quality management and failed to implement compensating controls to manage its ongoing risk. The Board continues to monitor Citigroup's actions to comply with the 2020 action, which remains in effect. The Board's action is being taken in coordination with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The penalties announced by the Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency total approximately $135.6 million. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday fined Silvergate Capital Corporation and Silvergate Bank $43 million for deficiencies in Silvergate's monitoring of transactions in compliance with anti-money laundering laws. The Board's action was taken in coordination with an action by the Department of Financial Protection and Innovation of the State of California, the state supervisor of Silvergate. The penalties announced by the Board and state total $63 million. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission separately announced a penalty against Silvergate Capital Corporation. Silvergate separately announced last year that it was voluntarily winding down its operations, and has now paid back all deposits to its customers. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Jiko Group, Inc., San Francisco, CaliforniaCease and Desist Order dated July 16, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: North Shore Bank of Commerce, Duluth, MinnesotaFlood insurance violations, civil money penalty, dated July 18, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday took action to address consumer compliance breakdowns by Green Dot, fining the firm $44 million for numerous unfair and deceptive practices and a deficient consumer compliance risk management program. Green Dot violated consumer law in its marketing, selling, and servicing of prepaid debit card products, and its offering of tax return preparation payment services. For example, Green Dot failed to adequately disclose the tax refund processing fee for tax preparation services offered on a third party's website. The firm also blocked access to accounts of legitimate customers receiving unemployment benefits and lacked reasonable policies and procedures to help those customers cure those blocks. In addition, Green Dot did not maintain effective consumer compliance risk management and anti-money laundering programs. The Board is requiring the firm to take several steps to improve these programs. Green Dot must hire an independent third-party to strengthen its consumer compliance risk management program and address the root causes of consumer complaints. The firm also must develop an effective anti-money laundering program and hire an independent third-party to conduct a review of certain transaction activities. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At Financial Inclusion Practices and Innovations Conference, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Art, and let me say how excited I am to be a part of the Federal Reserve Board's inaugural conference on financial inclusion and innovation.1Financial inclusion is central to the Federal Reserve's mission of promoting a strong and stable financial system and a healthy economy that works for everyone. This event brings together academics, practitioners, and thought leaders to discuss how financial products and practices are evolving to better meet the needs of individuals and businesses historically underserved by the financial system. I have spent much of my career in the public sector and academia working on topics related to financial inclusion. I've found that projects that bring together public, private, academic, and nonprofit perspectives are often the most productive, since we all approach the issue differently and can learn from each other's perspectives. Forums like these provide good opportunities to form connections and spark collaboration. Looking over the past few decades, significant progress has been made in improving financial inclusion, including progress on many of the issues that will be discussed at this conference. And yet we still have further to go. Continued support for responsible innovation in this space is needed and can benefit from engagement across industry, academia, and regulators. This morning, I will touch on how approaches to financial inclusion have evolved, where things stand today, and how we can continue progress toward a more inclusive financial system. Advancing the Goals of Financial InclusionThe goal of financial inclusion is to improve access to affordable financial services that meet the needs of individuals and businesses. Banking the unbanked is part of that, but we also need to make sure that both bank and nonbank products and services are designed to meet the financial service needs of low- and moderate-income households. And we need strong consumer protections to guard against abuse. Banks are playing a pivotal role in innovating to serve low- and moderate-income households, sometimes in partnership with financial technology companies, or fintechs. For example, we have seen a growing number of banks offering small-dollar loans, expanding use of alternative data to underwrite and price their credit products, and investing in tools to help better understand consumers' financial health. When adopted in a responsible and well-managed manner—with systems, processes, and policies in place to monitor and manage related risks—these innovations can broaden access to fair, affordable, and transparent bank-provided credit. This in turn can create financial resilience among small businesses and help individuals and families become homeowners, build wealth, and become financially empowered. The Importance of Durable InclusionInnovations in banking services are important to improving financial inclusion. But to have a durable impact on society, innovations must be adopted responsibly. Banks must have controls to manage risks and prevent violations of law, and their approach must keep pace with the growth of new products and services. Complexity can exacerbate risks and requires banks to pay particular attention to ensure that laws are followed and customers protected. To the extent banks are working with fintech partners, banks have a responsibility to manage the risks associated with the third parties they partner with to serve their customers. We have, unfortunately, seen examples of failures of banks to effectively manage the risks of partnerships with other companies that support services to their end customers, and these failures have resulted in customer harm. In communities where people are living on tight budgets or with limited access to financial services, disruptions of this kind can be catastrophic. These examples are a reminder that providing innovative financial services comes with responsibilities to ensure that risks are appropriately controlled. Durably supporting financial inclusion means ensuring that necessary controls grow in step. Use of Alternative DataWe do see great promise to improve financial access when innovation is done with the appropriate risk controls in place. One such promising avenue is the use of alternative data in credit decisions involving small-dollar loans. Historically, access to the financial system was limited for many households and small businesses that lacked key financial credentials. For example, traditional credit models favor an applicant that already has a sufficient credit history and a file from a credit reporting bureau to qualify for lending. This leads to a catch-22 where lower-income applicants with scant credit history but ample ability to repay are denied access to credit because they do not have a credit history.2As a result, many lower-income households, both banked and unbanked, end up using a range of formal and informal services outside the banking system that too often keep households in a cycle of debt.3 Actions by the Federal Reserve have supported the opportunities, as well as identified potential risks, associated with innovations in bank products and practices marketed to those who have limited access to the financial system. In 2019, the Federal Reserve's alternative data statement highlighted the benefits and risks when banks and nonbank firms leverage alternative data in credit underwriting, particularly for borrowers that have been locked out of conventional borrowing.4This guidance underscored the potential benefit of using data that has a clear connection to creditworthiness, such as information on inflows and outflows from a bank customer's deposit account. With the share of households with bank accounts much larger than the share with credit scores and especially with prime or near-prime credit scores, this information has the potential to allow underwriting of a much larger pool of potential reliable borrowers. In addition, in 2020, the Federal Reserve issued principles for responsible small-dollar lending, typically uncollateralized loans of less than $2,000 that often leverage alternative data while being underwritten.5This guidance has encouraged the spread of these types of loans to households and small businesses that otherwise have had limited access to credit.6In addition, given the small but growing number of banks partnering with fintechs for alternative data and small-dollar lending, among other things, the Federal Reserve issued guidance in 2023 and 2024 on how to responsibly manage these third-party relationships.7Taken together, these statements are helpful resources to ensure that banks are using the technological innovations from these third parties in safe and responsible ways. As noted in the alternative data guidance, alternative data can be sourced from a bank's own relationship with its customers. And evidence from research and industry experimentation suggests that information on cash flow from an individual's bank account can help predict credit risk while expanding credit access.8 We are already seeing progress in this space. Banks and credit unions of all sizes are starting to use alternative data to offer small-dollar loans to their existing customers with short-term liquidity needs. Given the early promise of these loans, this area seems particularly suitable for banks to innovate and experiment safely and fairly, within the confines of safety and soundness standards and consumer protection laws. In addition, banks and others have done extensive work over the past few years to measure the impact of bank products on the financial outcomes of customers. Among those metrics are a set of financial health indicators around a customer's cash flow and payment history that capture their ability to meet their own short-term liquidity needs, build financial capacity, and affordably access financial services over time.9Such indicators can help banks better understand the impact of their products and services on their customers, so that they support their customers' longer-term financial resilience. These indicators can also equip customers with the transparency and tools to assess financial service offerings. Potential of Instant PaymentsI'd also like to highlight the potential for real-time payment systems—including FedNow®and private sector systems—to advance financial inclusion. These services will enable banks to offer customers the ability to send and receive money immediately, which can help customers weather income disruption and unexpected expenses. By reducing payment delays and the high costs for consumers associated with those delays, FedNow can over time improve access to the financial system and lower costs. Increased Access to Consumer DataI'm also interested to see how increased access to consumer-authorized data will change the landscape for innovation. As the rules, regulations, and practices related to expanded access and sharing of customer-permissioned data flows evolve, consumers may benefit from having a fuller picture of their financial life to better understand ways to improve their financial health. Customer-permissioned data access, alongside innovations in digital identity, also has the potential to allow banks to better assess a borrower's creditworthiness, increase customer access to financial services, offer customized and innovative financial products, and empower individuals to move more freely in the emerging digital financial system. Of course, bank adoption will play a key role in unlocking the power of such innovation. As with most innovations, regulators will need to ensure appropriate measures are in place to protect consumers and promote financial stability. For example, regulators will need to be diligent so that the entities to which consumers grant access to their data safeguard privacy and data security. Community Reinvestment Act: Past, Present, and FutureLet me turn now to the importance of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and its role in advancing financial inclusion. As we know well, access to financial services and credit is fundamental to economic security and vital to strong communities. This access is the foundation of homeownership, education, small business development, and other economic activities that improve our lives and neighborhoods. I want to relate these values to the CRA and the Federal Reserve's commitment to encourage access to credit in low- and moderate-income communities. Congress enacted the CRA in 1977 as one of a set of laws, together with the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the Fair Housing Act, and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, to address redlining, other forms of racial discrimination, and lack of access to credit in low- and moderate-income communities. Fair lending laws set the unequivocal standard that there is no place for such discrimination in the financial system. Federal banking agencies reinforce this standard by taking a bank's fair lending record into account when assigning a CRA rating and evaluating whether banks meet the credit needs in low- and moderate-income communities, consistent with safe and sound lending. Through the enactment of the CRA, Congress charged the Federal Reserve and other federal bank regulators with the responsibility of assessing the performance of banks in meeting the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities. Throughout the CRA's nearly 50 years of supervisory history, the agencies have strived to provide guidance that reflected dynamic changes in the financial landscape and at some points in time revise the regulations to do so. Last October, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule to strengthen and modernize the regulations implementing the CRA.10Prior to the issuance of the final rule, the regulations had not been significantly updated since 1995. Throughout the rulemaking process, bankers and community groups consistently emphasized the need for greater clarity, consistency, and transparency than was provided under the existing rules and guidance. In response, much of the detail in the final rule is designed to provide the desired additional clarity. The final rule standardizes the evaluation approach so that it is more consistent across the agencies and more transparent to banks and the public. It does this in a way that builds on how CRA examinations are conducted today. The final rule includes several provisions intended to advance financial inclusion. For example, it emphasizes the work that minority depository institutions (MDIs) and community development financial institutions do to expand access to credit and opportunity in underserved communities. It also includes a focus on activities that serve Native Land Areas, persistent poverty areas, and other high-need areas. We take our supervisory responsibilities under the CRA seriously, knowing that it helps to foster real opportunity for consumers and communities. The CRA has served as a critical tool to support financial inclusion across the country since its passage and will remain a vital tool for bankers and community organizations to work together to promote financial inclusion and economic development in low- and moderate-income communities. The Future of Financial InclusionGiven the importance of innovation to the goal of financial inclusion, I am grateful that we have been able to gather so many experts on topics related to it. While we have made considerable progress, we need to continue our efforts to support greater inclusion and a financial system that meets the needs of all Americans. At the Federal Reserve, we will continue to work to improve our understanding of the innovations in financial inclusion, and the intersection of payments innovation and financial inclusion, among others. We also will use our position to monitor innovations that have financial inclusion implications—such as alternative data use and financial health measurement—and keep the public informed on the evolving industry practices that help meet the needs of the financially underserved. For example, we expect to provide additional resources on alternative data use in the coming months. In addition, the Fed's Partnership for Progress program helps MDIs and women's depository institutions (WDIs) navigate their unique business challenges, provides MDIs and WDIs with resources for technical assistance, and conducts research on the unique challenges faced by low- and moderate-income communities.11We also actively partner with Native American communities to better understand their financial needs. In addition to the Federal Reserve's role, the private sector is a key source for financial innovation, and we encourage businesses to responsibly innovate so that new tools that can increase financial inclusiveness are safe for customers and consistent with financial stability. We would all benefit from additional research in this area. For instance, how do we help ensure that expanding access to fair and affordable credit advances safe and sound lending? Empirically, which innovations are best able to meet customer needs safely and affordably, maintain bank safety and soundness, and promote a healthier economy? And how can we leverage concepts in behavioral economics to improve the effectiveness of credit products? I hope the conversations in today's conference can spark productive dialogue and spur potential research in these areas. ConclusionIn closing, my hope is that these kinds of efforts, as well as continued innovation in the banking system, can bring us closer to a time when all families and communities in our country have adequate access to credit and financial services on fair, affordable, transparent, and accessible terms. 1. The views here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau reports that, as of 2016, 26 million Americans (11 percent of adults) do not have a credit record at one of the three national credit reporting agencies. SeeKenneth P. Brevoort and Michelle Kambara,CFPB Data Point: Becoming Credit Visible(PDF)(Washington: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, June 2017).Return to text 3. For example, see Michael S. Barr, "Financial Services, Savings and Borrowing Among Low- and Moderate-Income Households: Evidence from the Detroit Area Household Financial Services Survey" (3rd Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies Papers, March 30, 2008), https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1121195.Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting," CA letter 19-11 (December 12, 2019).Return to text 5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Interagency Lending Principles for Making Responsible Small-Dollar Loans," SR letter 20-14 / CA 20-8 (May 20, 2020).Return to text 6. For more details on the impact of small-dollar loan guidance, seeDaniel Gorin, Sarah Gosky, and Michael Suher, "Empirical Assessment of SR/CA Small-Dollar Lending Letter Impact," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 28, 2023).Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Interagency Guidance on Third-Party Relationships: Risk Management," SR letter 23-4 (June 7, 2023); and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Third-Party Risk Management: A Guide for Community Banks," SR letter 24-2 / CA 24-1 (May 7, 2024).Return to text 8. For example, see FinRegLab, "The Use of Cash-Flow Data in Underwriting Credit: Empirical Research Findings (PDF)".Return to text 9. Examples of financial health indicators include a customer earning more than they spend monthly, having access to adequate savings, and maintaining a prime credit score.Return to text 10.Community Reinvestment Act (PDF), 89 Fed. Reg. 6,574 (February 1, 2024).Return to text 11. Details about the Partnership for Progress program for MDIs and WDIs can be found in SR letter 21-6 / CA 21-4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Highlighting the Federal Reserve System's Partnership for Progress Program for Minority Depository Institutions and Women's Depository Institutions," SR letter 21-6 / CA 21-4 (March 5, 2021).Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri Thank you, Jeff, and thank you to the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for the opportunity to speak to you today.1So far, 2024 has been a challenging year for economic forecasters, and for monetary policymakers. After significant progress in 2023 toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) price-stability goal, inflation jumped in the first quarter. At the same time, both the labor market and economic growth ran strong enough that some commentators wondered whether monetary policy was restrictive enough and whether rate hikes should be back on the table. These twists and turns in the economic data shifted everyone's expectations back and forth as to when the FOMC might begin lowering its policy interest rate and how many cuts there would be this year. During this time, my consistent view was that there was no urgency to cut rates until the Committee is confident that inflation is returning sustainably to 2 percent. Then, in the second quarter, data on inflation and the labor market moderated in a way that suggests progress toward price stability has resumed. The data over the past couple months shows the economy growing at a more moderate pace, labor supply and demand apparently in balance, and inflation slowing from earlier this year. These are all developments that support progress toward achieving the FOMC's dual-mandate goals. For reasons that I will elaborate on later, I believe current data are consistent with achieving a soft landing, and I will be looking for data over the next couple months to buttress this view. So, while I don't believe we have reached our final destination, I do believe we are getting closer to the time when a cut in the policy rate is warranted. Before turning to the economic outlook, let me say a word about central bank communication—in particular, communication about the policy path. Central bankers use communications to try, as much as possible, to describe the extent of progress, and even more importantly, the remaining path to the ultimate destination. The problem is that there may not be just one path to the ultimate destination—it depends on the incoming data. For example, when leaving work, you have a normal route to get home, and that is the base case for your estimated commuting time. But that day's traffic conditions will dictate whether you should take that route or an alternative to get home. You need to think about the alternative routes to get home and how long they will take if you are confronted with unexpected congestion. And, most likely, you will also have to communicate these alternative travel plans to family members so they have an idea of when you will arrive and how you will get the kids to after school activities. Central bankers face the same problem: How will you set policy if the data come in different than you expected? It is important to not only lay out your base case, but also alternative paths for policy if your base case is disrupted by incoming data. And for monetary policy, it is even more important to communicate those alternative policy paths to the public so that they can also make plans. So, after reviewing the economic outlook, I will explore three possible data scenarios about inflation for the second half of 2024 and how those differing scenarios affect my view of the appropriate stance of policy. Economic ActivityLet me start with the economic outlook. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at about a 4 percent annual pace in the second half of 2023 and then significantly slowed to a 1.4 percent rate in the first quarter. Recent forecasts indicate that output grew a little faster in the second quarter. We will get an initial estimate of second-quarter GDP next week, but the Blue Chip average of private-sector forecasts estimates that GDP grew at a 1.8 percent pace in the second quarter, and the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow model estimates growth at 2.5 percent. A big reason for the higher GDPNow estimate is because it was updated after yesterday's retail sales report. Digging into that report, one finds that the data directly informing the Bureau of Economic Analysis's estimate of consumer spending posted solid gains for June and revised up sales for both April and May. I suspect that this moderate consumption growth may continue in the second half of the year because personal income data is holding up. A signal of possible slowing in economic activity comes from the Institute for Supply Management's (ISM) survey of purchasing managers for non-manufacturing firms. Nonmanufacturing firms constitute the large majority of businesses in the economy. The non-manufacturing index fell below 50 in June, suggesting a contraction in activity. As a part of that survey, "business activity," corresponding to production or sales, fell below 50 for the first time since May 2020. The index for new orders fell especially sharply and the employment index fell further into contractionary territory. Clearly, economic activity among these businesses is slowing, but it is too soon to say by how much. Previous months when the overall index fell below 50 were followed by sustained periods above that threshold, so we will have to wait and see what this current reading means for a slowing in this sector. Meanwhile activity among manufacturing businesses has been fairly steady this year after contracting from late 2022 through 2023. New orders and most other readings are close to 50. The Labor MarketOne development in the past few months with significant implications for monetary policy is that labor supply and demand have finally come into rough balance. Demand of workers exceeded supply for several years, contributing significantly to high wage inflation, which inevitably fed through into services inflation. Supply was damaged after the pandemic, as many people left the workforce to care for family, older workers retired, and immigration fell significantly. At the same time, the economy grew solidly, and labor demand rose at a brisk pace. The imbalance in the labor market was reflected in a surge in job openings, with two vacant jobs for each worker counted as looking for work, nearly double the rate prior to the pandemic. There was also a surge in the number of people quitting their jobs, most of them to take a higher-paying job elsewhere. But now that situation has changed dramatically. Labor supply has improved, with a higher labor force participation rate and much higher rates of immigration. Not long ago, I would have been concerned that the high levels of job creation reported recently were inconsistent with a labor market coming into better balance, but the high pace of immigration in recent quarters helped accommodate the strong demand. And, more recently, as restrictive monetary policy has put downward pressure on aggregate demand, the demand for labor has moderated. The unemployment rate has risen from a 50-year low to 4.1 percent, still low in historical terms but the highest since late 2021. In May, the ratio of job vacancies to unemployed people stood at 1.2, which was the average in the year before the pandemic. The share of workers who quit their jobs is now slightly below the pre-pandemic level. One indication that this is a loosening, rather than a weakening, of the labor market is that layoff rates have been more or less steady at the low rate of around 1 percent. To me, this is all evidence of labor supply and demand in balance. Back in 2022, I wrote a research note with Fed economist Andrew Figura on the Beveridge curve, which is the relationship between unemployment and the job vacancy rate.2In that research, we projected that, if layoffs were steady, the unemployment rate would rise to around 4.5 percent if the job vacancy rate dropped back to its pre-pandemic level of 4.6 percent. The latest data estimated the vacancy rate in May as 4.9 percent, pretty close to the pre-pandemic level. There were some prominent skeptics, but this data tells us that if inflation continues to moderate as it has since May, then we may achieve the soft landing in the labor market that I said back then was possible, with even less of a tradeoff in terms of unemployment. Another sign of balance in the labor market is that wage growth has continued to slow. The twelve-month change in average hourly earnings has slowed from its peak of about 6 percent in March 2022, to 4.3 percent by December 2023, and is down to 3.9 percent as of June. The three-month increase through June was running at an annual pace of 3.6 percent, which is close to what I judge is the rate needed to support inflation running at 2 percent in a sustained way. And this interpretation is consistent with other measures that suggest wage growth is back to its pre-pandemic level. So what lies ahead for the labor market? Right now, the labor market is in a sweet spot—employment growth is not excessive when accounting for immigration, nominal wage growth is near the rate consistent with price stability, the unemployment rate is close to what is thought of as its long run value, the job vacancy rate is near its pre-pandemic level and the involuntary layoff rate has held steady at 1 percent for over 2 years. In terms of the employment leg of the dual mandate, we may well be able to achieve the soft landing. But we need to keep the labor market in this sweet spot. As my research note highlighted, the history of the Beveridge curve indicates that, given the normalization of the labor market, a continued decline in the job vacancy rate and the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio may lead to a larger increase in unemployment than we have seen the past two years. In short, one implication of a balanced labor market is that the risk of it becomingtoo looseis more closely balanced with the risk of it being too tight. This is a policy challenge that we have not faced for the past couple years. As of today, I see there is more upside risk to unemployment than we have seen for a long time. InflationLet me now turn to the outlook for inflation. After making progress last year toward our 2 percent goal, early this year I was concerned that progress might have stalled. But data in recent months has been reassuring. Last week's consumer price index (CPI) report was the second month of very good news. It showed that total consumer prices fell in June, after staying flat in May. This means that CPI inflation for the 12-months through June declined to 3 percent, while the 3-month annualized change dropped to 1.1 percent. For consumers who have been dealing with prices that are still significantly higher than before the pandemic, this is good news, and with continuing solid gains in wages and other income, over time I hope it will begin to feel like the level of prices is becoming more manageable. For policymakers, this was also welcome news. Factoring out energy and food prices, which tend to be volatile, core CPI inflation rose only 0.1 percent last month, the slowest pace since the pandemic. This brings 3-month annualized core inflation down to an annual rate of 2.1 percent. Based on the consumer and producer price data reported last week, private sector forecasters are predicting that the FOMC's preferred inflation gauge based on personal consumer expenditures (PCE) rose 0.1 percent in June and that core PCE inflation rose 0.2 percent. So, after disappointing data to begin 2024, we now have a couple of months of data that I view as being more consistent with the steady progress we saw last year in reducing inflation, and also consistent with the FOMC's price stability goal. The evidence is mounting that the first quarter inflation data may have been an aberration and that the effects of tighter monetary policy have corralled high inflation. To see this, consider the average monthly rate of core PCE inflation over the past 18 months. In the first quarter of 2023 it averaged 0.4 percent, and then 0.3 percent, 0.2 percent and 0.1 percent over the remaining quarters of the year. Core PCE inflation jumped to a monthly average of 0.4 percent in the first quarter of this year but is now estimated to be back to 0.2 percent last quarter. Most importantly, I don't have to look at the second decimal place to see progress! The recent data are making me more confident we will achieve the inflation goal of our dual mandate. Monetary PolicyNow let me turn to the implications of this data for monetary policy. As I noted earlier, the changes in the data this year have made it hard to formulate an outlook for policy that would apply to the range of possible paths the economy may take. That range of possibilities must consider two risks. On the one hand, it is essential that monetary policy get inflation down to a sustained level of 2 percent. If we start to loosen policy too soon, and allow inflation to flare up again, we risk losing credibility with the public and allowing expectations of future inflation to become unanchored. That credibility has helped inflation fall as quickly as it has in the past 18 months and squandering it would be a grave mistake. Monthly PCE inflation has very recently been running near 2 percent at an annual rate, but I need to see a bit more evidence that this will be sustained. The other risk is that we wait too long to ease monetary policy and contribute to a significant economic slowdown or a recession, with unemployment rising notably. With those two risks in mind, let me lay out three scenarios for the economy this year that would result in leading me to different views about appropriate policy. One assumption I make is that there is no significant deterioration in the labor market in the next several months—that we are able to keep the labor market in its current sweet spot. While I believe this is likely, I will be paying close attention to the employment side of our mandate. The first scenario is the optimistic one. Here we continue to receive more very favorable CPI inflation reports, with implications for very favorable PCE inflation readings as well. This would give us a nice run of inflation data starting in May. I see a significant but not high probability of this scenario occurring. And, in that circumstance, I would have much greater confidence in inflation moving sustainably toward 2 percent. In this scenario, I could envision a rate cut in the not-too-distant future. The second scenario is a bit less optimistic but probably more likely to occur. In this case, the inflation data comes in uneven—not as good as the previous few months but still consistent overall with progress on bringing inflation down toward 2 percent. Here, with the uneven data, it would be a matter of timing as to when I thought we are making sustainable progress to 2 percent inflation. In this case, a rate cut in the near future is more uncertain. The final scenario is the one that I certainly don't want to see but have to worry about. In this case, if we were to see a significant resurgence in inflation in the second half of 2024, it would be tough to conclude we were making sustainable progress on inflation this year. While this pessimistic outcome is possible, I put a low probability on it happening given the recent data we have received. These scenarios highlight that the data will influence how my confidence in inflation returning sustainably to 2 percent could evolve over time. And this will then influence my view of the appropriate path of policy. This all goes to say that my view of the appropriate path of policy is data dependent. In laying out these scenarios, I don't mean to suggest that I will ignore other data and what they tell us about economic and financial conditions. As always, my judgments about appropriate policy will consider the totality of the data, including importantly the signals we receive about the state of the labor market, which has eased and now looks to be in balance. But for the purpose of clearly communicating my thinking about the stance of policy over the next several months, I think these scenarios are helpful. And given that I believe the first two scenarios have the highest probability of occurring, I believe the time to lower the policy rate is drawing closer. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Andrew Figura and Chris Waller (2022), "What Does the Beveridge Curve Tell Us about the Likelihood of a Soft Landing?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 29).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Exploring Conventional Bank Funding Regimes in an Unconventional World" A Research Conference Co-Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Atlanta, Dallas, Texas Earlier this year, we passed the one-year anniversary of the failures of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and Signature Bank. The failure of these banks, and the subsequent failure of First Republic Bank, prompted a discussion of the regulatory framework. These failures have also frequently been cited as the basis for a number of matters on the current regulatory reform agenda. Over time, this agenda has expanded to include bank capital regulation, the role of supervision, the potential vulnerabilities to the banking system created by bank-fintech partnerships, and bank liquidity and funding, among other topics.1 This conference covers a number of important issues that touch on many aspects of this regulatory reform agenda. Earlier today, panelists discussed the 2023 regional banking stress, the history of financial crises, and deposit insurance reform. Tomorrow we will hear about the discount window and a discussion on the future of contingent liquidity. A further panel will consider what may be next in terms of regulatory reforms. In considering this last topic, conferences like this serve an important role—encouraging us to pause and reflect upon these efforts, and providing an opportunity to share thoughts in full public view about what is working and not working within the bank regulatory framework. These discussions also allow us to consider a range of options to both enhance banking system resiliency and to better prepare for future stress in the system. I am especially pleased that we have an opportunity to publicly confront difficult questions, like probing the link between last year's banking stress and elements of the reform agenda purportedly aimed at addressing identified deficiencies. As we think about reform of the bank regulatory framework, including changes designed to maintain a robust and responsive approach, what are the principles that should guide our thinking? What lessons should we take from past financial crises in terms of the causality and related bank management and supervisory lessons learned? Were those reforms responsive, successful, and durable over time? When we consider the Federal Reserve's operational infrastructure, including Fedwire® and discount window lending, were its tools effective and complementary to other funding sources (including Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) funding) during times of stress, and if not, how could they be improved? My hope is that in discussing these issues we can develop a better and deeper understanding about sources of bank funding, financial stability, and the future of the banking system. This complex set of issues can be open to interpretation, and as a result, can lead policymakers to different policy prescriptions for how to make the banking system more resilient, and the regulatory response to financial stress more effective. Conversations like those that we are having today and tomorrow can help us find consensus both in identifying the risks to the financial system and coming to agreement on policy reforms to address them, if needed. As the discussions continue following this conference, it is essential that we include the experience and perspective of state bank commissioners. I look forward to the opportunity to engage with them more fully on these issues. As a former bank commissioner, I greatly value this perspective. I am hopeful that all of these conversations can help us to understand differing perspectives and enable us to examine the full extent of the underlying issues before we implement reforms that do not address identified problems or do not adequately consider the underlying risks and unintended consequences. When I think about regulatory reform and the future of the banking system, I begin with the foundational elements that promote accountability in banking regulation: a deep understanding of the banking system; a thorough analysis of the underlying facts; a careful identification of how elements of the banking system interact and perform over time, especially during stress; and a commitment to take ownership of identified problems with targeted reforms that are commensurate with the underlying risks. These same elements should be the foundational elements of any reform agenda. They should apply not just to changes that I will call "responsive" changes—those designed to mitigate the risks exposed during the spring 2023 banking stress—but also to any other contemplated reforms of the bank regulatory framework. If we approach this task with humility and with full accountability of unintended consequences, I expect that we will find opportunities in a number of areas. These involve not only imposing new requirements and expectations on individual banks, but also opportunities to remediate deficiencies and overlapping requirements within the regulatory framework. Both approaches may be equally effective in enhancing the resilience of the banking system and promoting U.S. financial stability. In my remarks this evening, I will reflect on these elements, as I share my views on the Fed's lender of last resort function, payments infrastructure, supervision, and regulation. Lender of Last Resort and Payments InfrastructureAs part of the reform agenda, we must consider how to operationally enhance and optimize tools like the discount window to meet banking system liquidity needs more effectively. This must include ensuring the payments infrastructure that supports bank funding mechanisms is equipped to operate not just during business-as-usual conditions, but especially during stress events. Last year's banking stress clearly demonstrated the need for reforms and updates, but these issues existed long before the bank failures. Some banks encountered frictions in using the discount window that made it less effective, and these frictions potentially exacerbated the stress that some institutions experienced. Limits on the availability of payments services, including Fedwire, may also have interfered with the ability to effectively manage bank liquidity. These issues require a careful and impartial review to understand the facts, particularly if we base reform efforts on the recent events. Addressing operational readinessMaintenance of existing infrastructure is an often overlooked and sometimes thankless job. When the payments infrastructure works "well enough," as it seemed to do in the lead-up to the spring banking stress, it is easy to take for granted that it will work during times of stress. However, this is an area where we must become more vigilant and avoid complacency. We know that SVB experienced difficulties in accessing discount window loans before its failure. Certainly, there are ways in which the Fed can enhance the technology, the operational readiness, and the services underpinning discount window loans and payment services to ensure that they are available when needed. On this front, I would note that the Federal Reserve recently published a proposal to expand the operating hours of the Fedwire Funds Service and the National Settlement Service (NSS), to operate 22 hours per day, 7 days per week, on a year-round basis.2The proposal also requested feedback on whether the discount window should operate during these same expanded hours. The comment period remains open on this proposal, but this seems like it would be a critical improvement, and one that would be responsive to identified shortcomings.3 Other changes are also needed to bring payment services and discount window lending into the 21st century, including modernizing the technology banks use to request loans electronically rather than relying upon a person to answer a telephone call, ensuring that collateral can move freely from the bank or FHLB to the Reserve Bank when needed, and identifying and reducing other areas of friction that banks experience in the use of the discount window. Operational improvements—including technology enhancements and investments—and improving operational readiness within the Federal Reserve System, should underpin any approach to improvements. Bank liquidity sourcesA critical component of the current reform agenda focuses on the ongoing evolution of bank funding and liquidity sources and mechanisms. Of course, any discussion about the discount window would be incomplete without considering these sources and mechanisms. The discount window is a critical tool, but it does not operate in isolation. It is also intended to be a source of liquidity as a last resort and at a penalty rate, not as a primary funding resource in the normal course of business at a market rate. While discount window lending can support bank liquidity, it is best thought of as an additional resource in the federal safety net that allows eligible institutions to weather disruptions in liquidity markets and access other resources. Banks have a range of options to manage liquidity needs during business-as-usual operations and during times of stress, including repo markets and FHLB advances. Within this framework, the discount window operates as a backup liquidity authority, a "last resort" for funding needs. In evaluating the bank liquidity framework, it is imperative that we consider and understand the interrelationships among these resources, liquidity requirements and regulations, and bank liquidity planning.4 These resources are complementary, so they must be thought about holistically when discussing and seriously considering changes to requirements. Yet, discussions about reforms are often approached in a piecemeal way. Some policymakers have stated that a potential response to the 2023 banking stress would be to require banks to preposition collateral at the Fed's discount window. The notion is that by forcing banks to preposition collateral in this way, banks will have a ready pool of liquidity to draw from during times of stress. This compulsory requirement to preposition collateral, it is argued, could also mitigate some of the stigma associated with using the discount window, and thereby improve its effectiveness. So, we must also ask if the perceived stigma of taking loans from the discount window will be mitigated by requirements to preposition collateral. If the stigma of receiving a discount window loan continues to impede the effectiveness of the Fed serving as a lender of last resort, we must consider other ways to address these stigma concerns. There is no reason for a bank to take a loan at a penalty rate or preposition collateral during periods of calm if the discount window operates effectively and communicates with banks on a regular basis. If the issue is that the window does not operate in an effective manner, requirements to use it will not succeed. Investments must be made to address its operational shortcomings. Some reforms, like encouraging bank readiness to borrow from the discount window if that is part of their contingency funding plans, could be explored more thoroughly. If a bank includes the discount window in these plans and intends to use it during stress, the bank should be prepared to do so. But if we are honest, we recognize that our prior efforts to reduce discount window stigma, as during the COVID period, have not been durable or successful. There are a number of reasons a bank could choose to borrow from the discount window, including market disruptions in liquidity access or a scarcity in the total amount of reserves in the banking system and a specific borrower's growing financial stress. To access primary discount window credit, a borrower must meet financial standards for borrowing. In some ways, these financial requirements to access primary credit suggest that an important "market signal" of discount window borrowing is related to a market liquidity disruption and may be less of a signal about any individual institution's financial condition. But discount window lending is an additional data point for the market and may be read as a sign of financial distress. This possible interpretation alone may be enough to deter usage of the discount window. As we consider the future of the discount window, we should explore ways to validate the use of discount window lending in our regulatory framework. For example, are there ways to better recognize discount window borrowing capacity in our assessment of a firm's liquidity resources, for example in calculating a firm's compliance with the Liquidity Coverage Ratio? As the resources available for bank funding continue to evolve, including the Federal Housing Finance Administration's (FHFA) active consideration of reforms to FHLB lending standards, we see direct impacts on access to liquidity. Even though the comment period for these changes just concluded on July 15, these significant shifts are already affecting how FHLB members will need to plan to use FHLB advances for liquidity funding. Making regulatory changes to liquidity requirements while the FHFA is shifting FHLB funding prioritization for its members leads to several questions that would need to be answered before engaging in prudent policy-making.5How would required collateral prepositioning at the discount window affect the availability or amount of FHLB advances that a bank can rely on for funding purposes? More broadly speaking, how will any requirement to preposition collateral at the discount window affect the availability and use of other funding resources or the day-to-day liquidity management practices of banks? A better approach would be to recognize and understand how the FHLBs support bank liquidity and work together with each FHLB through the Reserve Banks in advance of a bank stress to ensure that mechanisms are in place to facilitate the transfer of collateral to the discount window, and that the Reserve Banks have the appropriate seniority over such collateral. A practical and pragmatic approach will work to preserve the stability of the banking system much more effectively than disrupting the bank liquidity operations of the FHLB system that have been in place since the 1930s. When it comes to the next steps in liquidity reform, I think it is imperative that we tackle known and identified issues that were exposed during the banking stress in the spring of 2023. This must include updating discount window operations and technology and making sure that payment services are available when needed. But for other reforms, a number of important questions remain unanswered, including understanding both where there are frictions and weaknesses in the current bank funding landscape, and what the potential impact (including intended and unintended consequences) of these reforms on the banking industry could be. Reform of SupervisionBanking regulators play a vital role in promoting the safe and sound operation of individual banks and the stability of the U.S. financial system. These statutory responsibilities require banking regulators to ensure that banks are held to high standards: bank regulators enforce regulation to promote safety and soundness, engage in periodic examinations of banks and their holding companies, and require periodic reporting by regulated institutions. When a bank fails to meet these high standards, supervisory action can be taken to force remediation or, in some cases, impose an enforcement action that includes a civil money penalty. Last year's banking stress highlighted the need for improvements in bank supervision, with several notable failures to identify and appropriately escalate issues during the examination process. Supervision that is not focused on core risks erodes the resiliency in the banking system. Bank failures and losses to the deposit insurance fund certainly demand attention, review, and accountability, but the underlying issues suggest we need to ensure that supervision works appropriately over time. Many of the reforms targeted in this conference address broader structural concerns—like imposing sweeping new regulatory reforms, or broad changes to laws like those governing deposit insurance. I applaud the engagement on these issues, but often the most effective regulatory tool is supervision. Effective supervision requires transparency in expectations and an approach that incorporates remediating deficiencies as a part of meeting those expectations. Many of the risks identified during last year's banking stress did not involve novel or unique risks. Addressing concentration risk, interest rate risk, and liquidity risk are all key risks that have long been elements deemed critical for effective supervision in bank examinations. These risks are known to create significant vulnerabilities and can be fatal to individual institutions if not managed appropriately over time. It is clear in the case of SVB that these risks were not managed appropriately. Bank regulators and supervisors also failed to sufficiently identify and prioritize the appropriate risks. Instead, the focus was on broader, qualitative, and process- and policy-oriented risks. Ultimately, both the bank's management and examiners failed to appropriately emphasize these key issues. An important step in the reform agenda—and one of the most effective reforms to build resilience against future banking stress—is to improve the prioritization of safety and soundness in the examination process, ensuring a careful focus on core financial risks. In my mind, successful prioritization involves increased transparency of expectations and a renewed focus on core financial risks. This includes avoiding issues that are only tangential to statutory mandates and critical areas of responsibility. Where necessary, it also includes adopting a more proactive approach for bank management and bank supervisors to deal with identified risks. Our goal must be to avoid straying from these core issues to focus on less foundational and less pressing areas. There have been some notable examples of regulatory mission creep, including the climate guidance introduced last year by the banking agencies.6I have no doubt that this guidance is well-intended, and that climate change is an important public policy issue. But the question should be whether banks should be required to divert limited risk management resources away from critical, near-term risk management, with a parallel shift in focus by bank examiners. Looking at this guidance through the lens of prioritization, one could reasonably conclude that climate change is not currently a financial risk to the banking system and does not justify a shift in prioritization. While some may view this position as provocative, my goal is to demonstrate a more foundational point—mis-prioritizing supervisory objectives will have consequences, making banks riskier and the U.S. financial system less resilient over time. Regulatory ReformWhen it comes to regulatory reform efforts, we should acknowledge, as a starting point, that the bank regulatory system has undergone significant transformation since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, in response to the 2008 financial crisis. This has resulted in significantly increased liquidity and bank capital, new stress testing and resolution planning requirements, and several other improvements designed to promote bank resiliency. Not only the quantum, but the quality, of bank capital has also improved. Common equity tier 1 capital is now codified as the highest quality form of regulatory capital and is included within a capital framework thatalreadyincludes gold-plating over international capital standards. Measured against this baseline of resiliency, we need to carefully assess the need for regulatory improvements, while maintaining those elements of the bank regulatory framework that have proven durable and successful over time. I have not previously argued nor am I arguing today that the regulatory framework is perfect and beyond reproach. Or that there is no room for improvement or evolution over time. Where we find opportunities for needed improvements—either to maintain the system's effectiveness or respond to identified weaknesses—we should make those changes. But these changes should be motivated by a clear-eyed assessment of the facts, if the goal is to achieve changes that are focused, efficient, and durable over the long run. Before proposing regulatory reform measures to remediate or address issues identified during the spring 2023 banking stress, we should first reflect on the causes that contributed to the failures of SVB and Signature Bank. These bank failures were followed by government intervention in the form of a guarantee on uninsured deposits at these institutions, and the creation of a broad-based emergency lending facility—the Bank Term Funding Program—designed to reassure the market about the underlying strength of the U.S. banking system. Other characteristics of these bank failures—the rapid pace of depositors withdrawing uninsured deposits—appeared to deviate from the patterns seen in prior bank failures (in degree, if not in kind). But many of the core problems of these banks stemmed from well-known, core banking risks—interest rate risk, liquidity risk, and poor risk management. Each of these can be addressed effectively and efficiently through targeted improvements to the supervisory process. Supplementary leverage ratioOur current narrow approach to rulemaking—focusing on a specific reform, without considering the broader framework or context within which these rules exist—has created a corresponding narrowness when we think about the consequences of regulatory reform. An efficient regulatory system can build resilience both for bank safety and soundness and financial stability. Take for example missed opportunities in capital reform. The current set of capital reform proposals does not address or propose changes to leverage requirements, including the 5 percent leverage ratio that applies to U.S. global systemically important banks, commonly referred to as the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (or eSLR). Treasury market intermediation can be disrupted by constraints imposed by the eSLR, as occurred during the early days of market stress during the pandemic. It seems prudent to address this known leverage rule constraint before future stresses emerge that would likely disrupt market functioning. This narrow focus ignores that many requirements are intended to operate in a complementary way, and that these requirements in the aggregate may overlap or conflict, generating unintended consequences. The Federal Reserve has expressly acknowledged the complementary nature of these requirements, for example in noting that some leverage ratio requirements operate as a backstop to risk-based capital requirements.7And yet, the discussions of costs and benefits of reform tend to disregard the aggregate impact across rules, even when related reforms are proposed at the same time and the aggregate impacts can be identified and assessed.8 When policymakers publicly discuss changes to liquidity and capital, industry participants will modify their behavior in part to meet anticipated regulatory requirements, despite the regulatory uncertainty that accompanies reform efforts. While this response by banks is unfortunate, it is also predictable. Regulatory processMy remarks this evening have primarily focused on the substance of reforms and the importance of demonstrating a case to support the changes. But it is also necessary to pause and reflect on the importance of following established process and procedure. This is especially important as we think about the choice between making policy reforms through supervision or regulation. Passing regulations under the Administrative Procedure Act requires agencies to follow specific notice-and-comment rulemaking procedures. I think we should approach this process through the most stringent and conservative lens, particularly when it comes to some of the most consequential rulemakings of the last decade. Rulemaking entails publishing rationales for agency action and seeking public input. These procedural requirements serve an important purpose and ultimately promote better agency decisionmaking. One of the most effective tools we have for doing so is the use of public Board meetings to address matters of significant public interest. My hope is that material items on the reform agenda will continue to be handled through public meetings that give greater visibility and insight into the thinking and rationales of different policymakers. Closing ThoughtsI will conclude today's remarks by thanking all of our participants for joining us in Dallas and contributing to these important discussions. The elements that facilitate accountability parallel those elements necessary for effective reform—a deep understanding of facts, a careful identification of how elements of the banking system perform over time and during stress, and a commitment to take ownership of identified problems with targeted reforms that are commensurate with the underlying risks. As we engage in a review of our regulatory framework for liquidity and more broadly, these elements should serve as a guide to understanding the past and help us chart a path forward. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Federal Reserve System, Request for Comment, "Expansion of Fedwire® Funds Service and National Settlement Service Operating Hours," 89 Fed. Reg. 39,613 (May 9, 2024).Return to text 3. The comment period on this proposal has been extended until September 6, 2024. Federal Reserve System, Request for comment; extension of comment period, "Expanded Hours for Fedwire® Funds Service and National Settlement Service (PDF)" (June 21, 2024).Return to text 4. Michelle W. Bowman, "Bank Liquidity, Regulation, and the Fed's Role as Lender of Last Resort" (speech at The Roundtable on the Lender of Last Resort: The 2023 Banking Crisis and COVID, sponsored by the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, Washington, D.C., April 3, 2024).Return to text 5. The Federal Housing Finance Administration (FHFA) published a request for input on the core mission activities and mission achievement of the FHLBs. As noted in the request, the FHFA had previously found in theFHLBank System at 100: Focusing on the Futurereport that FHLBs should increase their support for housing and community development. See FHFA, "Request for Input: Federal Home Loan Bank Core Mission Activities and Mission Achievement (PDF)" (May 16, 2024). The comment period on this request for information closed on July 15, 2024.Return to text 6. Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions, 88 Fed. Reg. 74,183 (October 30, 2023).Return to text 7. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Interim Final Rule and Request for Comment, "Temporary Exclusion of U.S. Treasury Securities and Deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio (PDF)," 85 Fed. Reg. 20,578, 20,579 (April 14, 2020) ("This interim final rule does not affect the tier 1 leverage ratio, which will continue to serve as a backstop for all banking organizations subject to the capital rule.").Return to text 8. See, e.g., Office of the Comptroller of the Currency(OCC), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, "Long-Term Debt Requirements for Large Bank Holding Companies, Certain Intermediate Holding Companies of Foreign Banking Organizations, and Large Insured Depository Institutions (PDF)," 88 Fed. Reg. 64,524, 64,551, n. 97 ("The agencies recognize that their Basel III reforms proposal would, if adopted, increase risk-weighted assets across covered entities. The increased risk-weighted assets would lead mechanically to increased requirements for LTD under the LTD proposal. The increased capital that would be required under the Basel III proposal could also reduce the cost of various forms of debt for impacted firms due to the increased resilience that accompanies additional capital (which is sometimes referred to as the Modigliani–Miller offset). The size of the estimated LTD needs and costs presented in this section do not account for either of these potential effects of the Basel III proposal."). Even when the agencies estimate the effect of a proposal on other rules, the impact analysis tends to be narrow, such as focusing on the estimated shortfall that would be created by the interrelated rules and may overlook other pending rules. See, e.g., OCC, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and FDIC, "Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity (PDF)," 88 Fed. Reg. at 64,171 (Noting that the proposed revisions to the calculation of risk-weighted assets under the Basel III endgame proposal would affect the risk-based total loss-absorbing capacity and long-term debt requirements applicable to Category I bank holding companies but disregarding the pending proposal that would expand long-term debt requirements to a broader set of firms).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on June 3 and June 12, 2024. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on June 11–12, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board’swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJune 11–12, 2024:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Fed Listens: Exploring Challenges Facing the Childcare Industry, Working Parents, and Employers, Chicago, Illinois Thank you, Austan, for the warm welcome. It is really a pleasure to join you in Chicago for this year'sFed Listensevent.1When we startedFed Listensback in 2019, the initiative was part of a broad, comprehensive review of the decisionmaking framework we use to pursue our monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability. In the years that followed, we have met with people from across the country and from a wide variety of backgrounds and experiences to learn about how the economy has been recovering from the COVID experience. EachFed Listensevent created a wonderful opportunity to take a step back, to ask questions of those who are directly impacted by our policies and the prevailing economic conditions, and then reallylistento their feedback. I am extremely proud thatFed Listenshas grown and developed into an ongoing venue for the Federal Reserve Board and the Reserve Banks to foster an ongoing conversation and discussion with those who are directly experiencing current economic conditions. As many of you may recall, at last year'sFed Listensevent here in Chicago, we discussed youth employment and joining the labor force following the pandemic, which were especially inspiring. So, in that spirit, today is not only a wonderful opportunity to continue this important conversation in the Seventh District, but also an opportunity to dig deeper into issues that affect local families through the childcare industry, working parents, and employers. Austan and I enjoyed getting to know our panelists better earlier today, and I am looking forward to learning more about their experiences through the upcoming panels and discussions. I am also very pleased to welcome our audience—both in person and those tuning in online. I viewFed Listensas an excellent example of Board and System convenings that enable us to gain important insights about economic conditions by engaging directly with those experiencing the economy. As you all know, Fed officials and economists review a vast amount of economic data on a regular basis. Discussions like those we will engage in today provide color and context to supplement the other economic data we monitor. Your perspectives help us gain deeper insights into how we are meeting our dual mandate of maintaining maximum employment and stable prices. A better understanding of a wide variety of this type of data, from the considerations families face in making spending decisions (including the costs of childcare) to factors weighed by business owners in applying for loans and offering benefits to help attract top talent, all provide better insight into our data collection. These conversations help us to gain perspective on how Americans in different areas of the country are faring. Some of the issues discussed today may be unique to the Seventh District, but certainly many of these themes and dynamics are present throughout the country and across all 12 Federal Reserve Districts. Seeking out local perspectives is one of the great advantages of the Federal Reserve System's regional structure and of theFed Listensstructure in particular. Earlier, I had the pleasure to meet each of the panelists you'll hear from today. Their varied experiences and backgrounds across sectors lay an important foundation for today's discussion. We hope that our attendees will also join in to share your own observations as you experience these issues in your own lives, businesses, and communities. Your perspective will help to inform our work as policymakers with the responsibility to promote a strong and vibrant economy for all Americans. So with that, I would like to say, thank you again, Austan, and especially to recognize your entire Chicago Fed team for hosting thisFed Listensevent today and for the opportunity to be part of this discussion. Without further ado, I am delighted to get our conversation started by turning things over to Robin Newberger, who is a policy advisor here at the Chicago Fed. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Advance Together: Celebrating the Achievements of Texas Community Partnerships," a public event at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas (via pre-recorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. I'd like to thank everyone for joining us today to celebrate the achievements of Texas community partnerships. I am so excited to be a part of this important milestone, marking the end of the pilot round of Advance Together and to announce a second round for this initiative. Back in 2021, during the depths of COVID, I took part in the Dallas Fed's Advance Together launch event, welcoming the awardees into the initiative and looking ahead to their success. This is truly a special opportunity to recognize the progress and achievements of the four participating partnerships, each representing their diverse communities and regions in the great state of Texas. Advance Together is an accelerator program for regional public–private–nonprofit partnerships seeking to improve education and employment outcomes for lower-income communities in Texas. The Dallas Fed and the Federal Reserve System are focused on reducing and removing barriers to education attainment and workforce development to foster a strong, resilient economy. As the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve Board is focused on our dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. When we think about maximum employment, we also need to consider how to foster an inclusive economy that provides economic opportunities for everyone regardless of their circumstances. Every Reserve Bank relies on its community development function to understand the economic circumstances of communities through community initiatives and research. In response to local needs in their respective Districts, each Reserve Bank develops initiatives and focus areas to support these efforts. Collaboration Matters for Better Community OutcomesAdvance Together was designed to address core challenges in education and workforce development. Often, a lack of coordination among key organizations, fragmentation across existing resources, or incomplete approaches that don't fully identify or address the root causes of community issues lead to less successful outcomes. Research from the Boston Fed has found that durable economic success throughout economic cycles is less dependent on factors like industry mix, demographics, or even geographic location. Instead, it is the ability of local leaders to work together across different sectors that leads to economic resilience. Leaders that collaborate with an identified plan and path over a sustained period of time toward a comprehensive vision achieve better outcomes and more inclusive economic growth. A few years ago, the Dallas Fed identified an opportunity in Texas to support community partnerships, specifically in education and workforce development. Working across different sectors and industries brings its own set of unique challenges. Each brings different goals, operations, and even terminology to the discussion. We know that collaboration is necessary, and it is achievable. Advance Together provides the structure, ongoing support, and investment from external partners to support communities in strengthening their collaborative work. It takes time and skill to build deep and trusting partnerships. It also takes time and resources for communities to agree upon a common understanding of complex, local needs like improving college and career readiness or developing pathways to living wage employment. This work requires that all partners move in the same direction, toward those common strategies and goals. When communities collaborate effectively, the results can lead to broader access to economic opportunity. AT Team IntroductionsWe are here today to celebrate the success of our pilot participants; I'd like to reintroduce each of them: ConclusionAs we begin today's celebration, I'd like to recognize the vision of the Dallas Fed team for creating this incredible opportunity for our partners. I'd also like to thank our Advance Together partnerships for their hard work and progress. I also want to recognize them for the work that they will continue to accomplish in their communities as they move forward. This work is challenging and will continue to build pathways to a more inclusive economy.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Financial Inclusion Practices and Innovations, Washington, D.C. Good afternoon and welcome back to the second half of today's conference on Financial Inclusion Practices and Innovations.1It is really a pleasure to join you to discuss this important topic. This morning, our panelists provided their perspectives on issues related to supervision and regulation and payment frictions and innovations both domestically and internationally. The research and perspectives they discussed can certainly help to broaden our understanding of financial inclusion and all of the associated challenges. Together, our work to promote initiatives that further this work will enable greater access to financial services. An economy that works for everyone necessarily includes a more inclusive financial system. More expansive inclusion opportunities improve the financial well-being of both consumers and small businesses, thereby contributing to overall economic growth. Today, I would like to highlight the excellent work being done in this area by our Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (DCCA). I will also touch on some ways that the banking system and private sector can support financial inclusion. Promoting an Inclusive Financial System Is a Foundational Element of DCCA's WorkBefore discussing our work at the Federal Reserve, I would like to first take a step back to anchor financial inclusion within the broader objective of fostering an economy that works for everyone. A healthy and robust U.S. economy relies upon broad access to financial resources and education. Bringing consumers and small businesses into the financial mainstream helps them more fully engage in the financial system and the economy and should help to facilitate the more effective operation of the U.S. economy. Through its responsibility for community affairs, DCCA works to achieve a thorough understanding of current community conditions and best practices by conducting research and convening relevant private sector participants. Today, we will focus on their important work to enhance financial access. As the chair of the Consumer and Community Affairs Committee, I oversee these efforts. As many of you know well, DCCA's financial inclusion work is expansive, and I look forward to highlighting these contributions with you today. First, DCCA informs internal and external stakeholders by leveraging its research and analysis to provide information that can be utilized by external stakeholders to support their work. For example, one of the Fed's most important contributions to the study of financial well-being is the annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, or the SHED. We published the 11th annual report in May. The report addresses topics including financial well-being, savings, retirement, economic fragility, education, and student loans.2 The Federal Reserve System also conducts an annual Small Business Credit Survey (SBCS), which is a survey of over 6,000 firms with fewer than 500 employees located throughout the country. This year's survey found that many small businesses were experiencing tight financial conditions and often had to rely on personal financial resources, such as personal funds or a loan from family or friends, to support their businesses.3Because access to credit is fundamental to broader financial access and inclusion, this experience of reliance on personal financial resources shows that the credit needs of small businesses may not be fully met by the financial industry. Another way DCCA pursues greater financial inclusion is by convening, informing, and engaging with stakeholders. For example, the Community Advisory Council (CAC), which consists of members of the non-profit sector and hands-on community development practitioners, meets with the Board of Governors twice each year to share their experiences and observations and to engage on challenges facing the consumers and communities they serve. The CAC focuses on the concerns of low- and moderate-income people, and at its most recent meeting in May, the CAC focused on a range of economic matters continuing to affect financially vulnerable communities. DCCA also prioritizes the work of mission-driven organizations in its efforts to expand financial inclusion. The Partnership for Progress (PFP) program is the Federal Reserve's Minority Depository Institution (MDI) outreach program created to support the System's mandate to preserve and promote MDIs. DCCA, in collaboration with other areas of the Federal Reserve, engages MDIs and Women-Owned Depository Institutions (WDIs) through national outreach efforts. The PFP provides technical assistance to help MDIs and WDIs address unique business model challenges, enabling these institutions to compete more effectively in the marketplace.4 Third, DCCA ensures that financial institutions under the Fed's jurisdiction comply with laws and regulations that protect consumers and promote community development, including fair lending laws and the prohibition on unfair and deceptive acts and practices. For example, DCCA examines state member banks for compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, which prohibits discrimination in any aspect of a credit transaction based on race, gender, marital status, age, or another prohibited basis. The division's work to protect consumers from harm furthers our goal to create an economy that works for everyone. Regulated Financial Institutions and Financial InclusionI would like to turn now to share some thoughts about how the private sector can engage to support financial inclusion. The U.S. banking system is well-positioned to bring consumers into the financial mainstream by providing innovative solutions to meet the credit needs of their communities. For example, banks help consumers and small businesses by providing financial products and services that are safe, fair, and responsive, including through small dollar loan products. These types of loans can help consumers and small businesses access credit for unexpected expenses. Data from the most recent SHED report found that 10 percent of adults with family incomes less than $50,000 per year used payday, pawn, auto title, or tax refund anticipation loans to obtain needed funds.5These types of products often carry high or even punitive direct and indirect costs and risks to the consumer. For example, non-repayment of an auto title loan can lead to vehicle repossession further complicating the consumer's financial situation. When banks offer small dollar loans, they can often do so on terms that are safer and at lower cost than other types of loans.6 Some banks that offer small dollar loan products often use automated underwriting based on alternative information that can include consumer-permissioned cash-flow data. If used appropriately, this approach can reduce bank underwriting costs, potentially making affordably priced loans available to consumers on a more timely basis. If these loans were more available in the banking system, they could serve as an alternative to more costly options from alternative financial services providers. Small dollar loans targeted to low- and moderate-income consumers have the potential to provide an accessible and more fairly priced alternative when consumers experience a financial emergency. Remittances and Financial InclusionAs we heard from our panelists earlier today, payments inclusion can look different in domestic and international contexts, but a reliable, safe, and cost-efficient payment system that minimizes unintended frictions is important to consumers around the world. International remittances can serve an important role in enhancing financial inclusion, especially in countries where these funds are a significant source of household financial support. And some research indicates that the ability to receive remittances increases the likelihood of bank account ownership, which furthers economic engagement.7 However, for those who send funds abroad using remittances, the costs can be substantial. For example, the average cost of sending $200 internationally from the U.S. is nearly 6 percent.8In addition to broader work on cross-border payments, the G20 countries have reaffirmed a commitment to reducing average remittance fees to below 3 percent by 2030. This could result in a greater proportion of funds reaching recipients.9Continued improvements to domestic and international payment systems and responsible innovation can further support our work on financial inclusion. ConclusionGreater inclusiveness in the financial system is an ongoing priority for the Federal Reserve. While we have made great progress, there is more to be done for both the public and private sectors. We should be open to considering how new or innovative products and services could promote financial inclusion. We should also be willing to engage with a wide range of stakeholders. Financial access and inclusion are not one-size-fits-all and can look very different to each consumer. Therefore, involving consumers and communities in identifying issues and crafting solutions is critical to success. Advancing financial inclusion will clearly take many hands and a diverse set of stakeholders, including everyone participating here today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "2023 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking," (2024). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2024).Return to text 3. Federal Reserve Banks,2024 Report on Employer Firms: Findings from the 2023 Small Business Credit Survey(Federal Reserve Banks, March 2024).Return to text 4. See the Federal Reserve's Partnership for Progress website athttps://www.fedpartnership.gov.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "2023 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking" (2024). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023(PDF)(Washinton: Board of Governors, May 2014).Return to text 6. Banks can look for guidance on small dollar loans through interagency statements related to alternative data and small dollar loans. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting," CA letter 19-11 (December 12, 2019), and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, "Interagency Lending Principles for Making Responsible Small-Dollar Loans," SR letter 20-14/CA letter 20-8 (December 12, 2019).Return to text 7. Gemechu Ayana Aga and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, "International Remittances and Financial Inclusion in Sub-Saharan Africa," Policy Research Working Paper 6991 (Washington: World Bank Group, Development Research Group, July 2014). David Malpass, "Remittances Are a Critical Economic Stabilizer," World Bank Blog, December 6, 2022.Return to text 8. The World Bank,Remittance Prices Worldwide Quarterly(PDF), Issue 48, December 2023, p. 11.Return to text 9. For more information on the G20 cross-border payments improvement roadmap and its progress, see Financial Stability Board,Enhancing Cross-Border Payments: Stage 3 Roadmap(PDF)(Financial Stability Board, October 2020), and Financial Stability Board,G20 Roadmap for Enhancing Cross-Border Payments: ConsolidatedProgressReport for 2023(PDF)(Financial Stability Board, October 2023). For more information on the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, see "Transforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development", Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations, and Financial Stability Board,Targets forAddressing theFourChallenges ofCross-BorderPayments: FinalReport(PDF)(Financial Stability Board, October 2021).Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, on July 10, 2024. Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Scott, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. The Federal Reserve remains squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Over the past two years, the economy has made considerable progress toward the Federal Reserve's 2 percent inflation goal, and labor market conditions have cooled while remaining strong. Reflecting these developments, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are coming into better balance. I will review the current economic situation before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookRecent indicators suggest that the U.S. economy continues to expand at a solid pace. Gross domestic product growth appears to have moderated in the first half of this year following impressive strength in the second half of last year. Private domestic demand remains robust, however, with slower but still-solid increases in consumer spending. We have also seen moderate growth in capital spending and a pickup in residential investment so far this year. Improving supply conditions have supported resilient demand and the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year. In the labor market, a broad set of indicators suggests that conditions have returned to about where they stood on the eve of the pandemic: strong, but not overheated. The unemployment rate has moved higher but was still at a low level of 4.1 percent in June. Payroll job gains averaged 222,000 jobs per month in the first half of the year. Strong job creation over the past couple of years has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers, reflecting increases in labor force participation among individuals aged 25 to 54 and a strong pace of immigration. As a result, the jobs-to-workers gap is well down from its peak and now stands just a bit above its 2019 level. Nominal wage growth has eased over the past year. The strong labor market has helped narrow long-standing disparities in employment and earnings across demographic groups.1 Inflation has eased notably over the past couple of years but remains above the Committee's longer-run goal of 2 percent. Total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in May. Core PCE prices, which exclude the volatile food and energy categories, also increased 2.6 percent. After a lack of progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective in the early part of this year, the most recent monthly readings have shown modest further progress. Longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Monetary PolicyOur monetary policy actions are guided by our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. In support of these goals, the Committee has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent since last July, after having tightened the stance of monetary policy significantly over the previous year and a half. We have also continued to reduce our securities holdings. At our May meeting, we decided to slow the pace of balance sheet runoff starting in June, consistent with the plans released previously. Our restrictive monetary policy stance is helping to bring demand and supply conditions into better balance and to put downward pressure on inflation. The Committee has stated that we do not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate until we have gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. Incoming data for the first quarter of this year did not support such greater confidence. The most recent inflation readings, however, have shown some modest further progress, and more good data would strengthen our confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. We continue to make decisions meeting by meeting. We know that reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could stall or even reverse the progress we have seen on inflation. At the same time, in light of the progress made both in lowering inflation and in cooling the labor market over the past two years, elevated inflation is not the only risk we face. Reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will continue its practice of carefully assessing incoming data and their implications for the evolving outlook, the balance of risks, and the appropriate path of monetary policy. Congress has entrusted the Federal Reserve with the operational independence that is needed to take a longer-term perspective in the pursuit of our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the long run. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans. Let me conclude by emphasizing that we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions. 1. A box in our latestMonetary Policy Report, "Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups," discusses differences in labor market outcomes among segments of the population.Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the 21st Annual Economic Measurement Seminar, National Association for Business Economics Foundation, Washington, D.C. Thank you for your generous introduction, Ellen. I am delighted to be here with the National Association for Business Economics (NABE), and, in particular, I am pleased to be speaking at a conference covering an issue that is close to my heart and on which I have spent many years working: economic measurement. When Federal Reserve officials tell audiences that their judgments are data dependent, some skeptics perhaps presume that monetary policy is already on a path set in stone. But most in this room likely know what I mean when I talk about data dependence. I am a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), which, of course, pursues a dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices.1When I say I am data dependent, that means I am considering the totality of the data—the full range of economic indicators that provide a sense of where the labor market, economic activity, financial conditions, and inflation have been and where they might be going. Policymakers must have high-quality and accurate data to understand the economy and set the correct policy. The truth is that it is not just the Fed that needs data. Consumers, businesses, investors, and others have access to more information than ever before when making decisions. It is incumbent on economists, private- and public-sector data collectors, and others to ensure that available data are carefully collected, accurately measured, and clearly presented, and that data collection and measurement efforts are further enhanced and continue to improve. To be sure, data collection and economic measurement can be challenging, and different types of data face pros and cons, which is why I take an expansive approach to using data, as I will explain a bit later. But I will begin by highlighting a few challenges to economic measurement. I will then provide some examples of how those challenges might be addressed. I will also provide examples of how nontraditional data generated by the private sector can help provide additional angles from which to view aspects of the economy that may not be clear in data produced by government statistical agencies. Finally, I will offer some examples of how, in recent years, our statistical agencies have adapted and innovated, sometimes by incorporating private-sector data to address specific measurement challenges I have in mind. To be clear, my interest in nontraditional data is not a critique of the statistical agencies. To the contrary, official data are critically important to policymakers, researchers, and the public. Rather, I view public and private data as being complementary and helping to provide a more complete picture of the economy. Importance of DataEconomic measurement, the task some of you contribute to every day, is at the core of real-time policy analysis and forecasting. We at the Board of Governors rely on a broad array of data produced by both government and the private sector. And we carefully scrutinize every important economic release and are very familiar with the methodological details of those reports. Suffice it to say, we care a lot about economic measurement at the Fed. And the Fed itself produces many important data series, including two principal federal economic indicators: the Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization report and the Consumer Credit statistical releases.2In addition, our website features numerous other data products that look at bank assets, liabilities, and structure; monetary aggregates; international finance; business finance; and household finance—including data on the level, share, and composition of wealth for households at different points in the wealth and income distribution, as well as for different demographic groups.3The Board also conducts separate surveys of consumers and household economic decision making and surveys of loan officers and credit officers, well known as the SLOOS and the SCOOS. Beyond the Federal Reserve Board, each of the Federal Reserve Banks engages in measurement and data production of various kinds, including closely watched surveys of firms and households. For example, the New York Fed conducts a survey of consumer expectations, which was just released last week, the Atlanta Fed tracks wage data, the Richmond Fed surveys firms on price-setting behavior, among other things, and several Reserve Banks publish alternative measures of inflation and reports on factory and business activity in their regions. Challenges with MeasurementOf course, as one reviews various sources of data, one can see that there are some common measurement challenges. I will mention a few. These are not new, nor is my list exhaustive. My intent here is to focus on challenges that highlight the tradeoffs in using public and private data and to show how these sources of data complement each other. The first challenge I will identify is that traditional measurement approaches sometimes struggle to track rapidly changing economic developments. This was the case early in the pandemic and is often true at turning points in the business cycle. Of course, it is at those very moments when policymakers, and the public, are most critically interested in how the economy is faring. The reasons for this lag are well known. Statistical agencies can only survey households and businesses every so often, and it takes time to compile and publish high-quality statistics. However, financial markets and business decisions move quickly. Reports produced on a monthly or quarterly basis, often with a multi-week lag, may not be available with sufficient frequency to inform real-time decisions. Also, some indicators, by design, take on new market information slowly. A recent and relevant example is housing services inflation, as measured as part of the consumer price index (CPI) and the personal consumption expenditures price index. Both rely heavily on slowly changing leasing agreements that only adjust to market conditions over many months. Business entries and exits, sometimes called births and deaths, are similar in that they take time to appear in surveys that underlie important statistical products. I will touch on that a bit more later. A second challenge is that many statistical reports were created decades ago and may not be focused on newer or growing sectors of the economy. For example, there are monthly reports on factory orders, shipments, inventories, and output among the principal economic indicators. Because developments in the goods sector can matter importantly for economic fluctuations, that level of detail is indeed helpful to have. But we would benefit from the same depth of information on domestically produced services, too. While service-sector output constitutes a larger share of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), the category has only one single dedicated quarterly report, even though much of the post-pandemic recovery requires us to understand how services consumption and employment have evolved. For example, did you know that quarterly hog and pig counts are a principal economic indicator? Yet, there is not a regular government report specifically dedicated to the gig economy. I am certainly glad we collect data for important agricultural commodities, but I think we should probably be examining the large and diverse gig economy as much as we do the pig economy. I believe the statistical agencies grapple with these issues, and it takes time to lay the groundwork and develop new data series, but this challenge is a real one. If reports are built for the past, that may mean they struggle to capture big developments today and in the future, such as the changing nature of where and how people work or the rising use of artificial intelligence (AI) technology. Finally, there is an impediment that everyone here is acutely aware of: These challenges are made even more difficult because official surveys have seen declining survey response rates. That results in lower precision of statistical estimates and can lead to the need for further, costly surveys to collect the necessary amount of information, as one may need to conduct several rounds of data collection before having sufficiently large samples that can provide reliable estimates. Declining response rates may also be selective and pose a challenge to representing the broader population. Innovative methods for data collection and behavioral interventions to encourage survey responses can be used to address concerns and are being tried in some cases by statistical agencies. A Data ExplosionWhile these challenges in traditional data that I have described may take some time to be addressed, I am encouraged by the explosion in data produced by the private sector over the past decade or so that can greatly enhance our understanding of the economy. Such data give an opportunity to measure economic developments with greater timeliness, at a higher frequency, and with more granularity. That said, those data often face their own challenges, including issues with representativeness, the lack of methodological consistency, and a short time-series history. Nevertheless, such nontraditional data can be helpful, especially when used jointly with official statistics to which these new sources can be benchmarked. A prominent example of valuable private-sector data is employment statistics from payroll providers. Such weekly data allowed economists at the Federal Reserve Board to understand, essentially in real time, employment losses when the pandemic first took hold in the United States in March 2020. In comparison, it took until early May to get similar information from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) employment report.4Indeed, in trying to understand the rapidly changing economy during the pandemic, Fed economists closely followed a variety of privately produced higher-frequency data. These included reports on restaurant reservations, hotel occupancy, and airport passengers. Economists even used anonymized phone-tracking data to estimate business shutdown rates and trends in retail spending.5 Credit and debit card transaction data are another example of a helpful, private-sector tool that economists use to understand consumer behavior in various sectors or regions in close to real time. These figures provided what proved to be a pretty reliable picture of economic developments during the pandemic, well before traditional statistics—such as quarterly GDP and monthly retail sales—became available.6The need for timely, high-frequency information is not limited to pandemics and turns in the national business cycle. For example, Federal Reserve Board economists have used credit and debit card transaction data to estimate the effects of local natural disasters almost in real time when official statistics are often not available.7 When we look at economic turning points, it is also important to consider reports on expectations and anticipated outcomes from nongovernment sources. Those include surveys of expectations of future inflation, anticipated hiring or layoffs, and consumer and business sentiment on the economy or the path of the economy. I pay close attention to these surveys because they are forward looking and help inform where behaviors by businesses and households may be trending. Tracking supply chains is another area where private-sector sources have proved extremely valuable, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. One important source of such data is the Institute for Supply Management's surveys of purchasing managers. While those series are well established and closely followed, Fed economists found them particularly helpful in recent years to observe supplier delivery times, order backlogs, items in short supply, and measures of inventory satisfaction. Other private-sector data give economists insight into supply chains as well, including measures of air, sea and overland freight costs; the number of waiting container ships; and the volume of railroad traffic. These data series offered additional details on the level of constraint in supply chains following the pandemic shock, alongside reports from official statistical agencies. I will offer two additional examples of how I use nontraditional data at the Fed—one from each side of our dual mandate. To better understand the labor market, I have been watching job vacancy, quit, and layoff data closely for many years. The official government source for this information is the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). While extremely important, JOLTS data are released with a lag of more than a month. And this survey has seen a particularly large decline in response rates.8This instance turned out to be another example of where private data could enhance my understanding. Job search sites' data on postings are updated more frequently than the federal report and generally confirm that JOLTS measurement appears to be accurate. Similarly, JOLTS data on layoffs are lagged. That is why I also look at other figures, including unemployment insurance claims; Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification, or WARN, notices; employment reductions from the Institute for Supply Management; anticipated layoffs from outplacement firm Challenger, Gray and Christmas; and mentions of layoffs in earnings reports and the Beige Book. With inflation, an important component to track recently has been housing services costs, which is typically the single largest expense for U.S. households. Housing services are a big reason why the overall inflation rate remains above our 2 percent target. The official measures of housing services inflation are intended to capture overall growth of housing costs—that is, costs incurred by owners and renters—drawing from a survey of rental lease terms. But rental leases tend to change only gradually, so the official measures can significantly lag current market conditions. That is why policymakers can also rely on current market rent data, showing what landlords charge new tenants, information that is available from multiple private-sector sources. Those data can provide some early signal of where official housing inflation series are likely headed. Here I have mentioned just a handful of private-sector data examples. But each of these helps address measurement challenges I mentioned earlier. From these data, we can gain timeliness and higher frequency, with a better read on underlying economic dynamics like market pricing. And with often low survey response rates in official data, these private-sector sources may provide another perspective on underlying economic developments. Official InnovationsWhile I see great value in considering data produced outside of statistical agencies, the private sector is not the only place where innovation in economic measurement is occurring. Statistical agencies have long made use of private-sector data, so there is nothing "nontraditional" about using private-sector data to shed more light on economic measurement; in fact, it is a long tradition. I can think of several examples. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) taps many private-sector sources in its compilation of GDP statistics, covering topics ranging from oil and gas drilling to insurance premiums.9At the Board, the Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization report features a long list of private data sources for the output of products ranging from semiconductors to lumber.10And our Consumer Credit statistics rely in part on data from a large credit bureau and an association of credit unions.11I could go on, but the broader point is that our country's statistical agencies do not ignore valuable sources of economic measurement that the private sector has to offer—far from it. They make significant use of private information in combination with official surveys and administrative data. And they are actively advancing that practice further. Economic developments in recent years have been met by a flurry of innovation and adaptation from statistical agencies, relying not only on private-sector sources but also on novel uses or production of government data. One notable product that I have mentioned in past speeches is the Census Bureau's Business Formation Statistics (BFS). First published in 2018, the BFS series was developed in collaboration with the Board's staff and relies on new business applications for Employer Identification Numbers, or EINs.12During the early months of the pandemic, weekly data from the BFS provided a timely indicator of the initial decline in economic activity, and then later the figures likewise documented the rebound.13 Another measurement invention was created during the early months of the pandemic: the Census Bureau's high-frequency "Pulse" surveys—one each for households and businesses. Those surveys leveraged existing Census Bureau resources to provide quick-turnaround information about the rapidly evolving health and economic situations.14 The Household Pulse Survey was rapidly developed shortly after the pandemic struck the U.S., with participation from a broad set of government agencies.15The survey provides a range of economic information about Americans, including the pandemic-induced jump in remote work. The survey has adapted over time as the health and economic situations have evolved, incorporating questions about vaccination, access to infant formula during a product shortage, inflation, and other issues. The Small Business Pulse Survey provided timely information about employment, revenue, financial conditions, and expectations for future growth, survival, and needs in the highly uncertain pandemic environment. Later iterations of the survey shed light on supply chains, as the United States grappled with input shortages and disrupted freight networks. The Small Business Pulse Survey was discontinued, but it planted the seeds for the current Business Trends and Outlook Survey, which provides a similar wealth of information about business conditions and is already the gold standard for understanding trends such as business-level implementation of AI technologies.16 The national accountants at the BEA have also shown a flair for innovation. For example, the bureau has introduced many "satellite accounts" and other special series over the years—some still in experimental form—with national account–style information about special topics, including health care, income distribution, global value chains, small business, the digital economy, and the space economy, among others.17Thinking of special-topic national accounts is a way the statistical agencies can keep up with an ever-evolving economy. In fact, the treatment of research and development investment in current GDP methodology originated as a satellite account.18 Another example comes from the BLS and, specifically, how the agency tracks market rents as part of its inflation data series, an issue I mentioned earlier. While the official statistics on housing services inflation do not break out new tenant market rents from the rest of the index, BLS staff recently began exploiting the housing survey data that underlie the CPI to construct a New Tenant Rent Index (NTRI).19The NTRI looks at quarterly changes in the terms offered in new leases. Data users are still learning how to best combine the signal from the NTRI with other measures of market rents, but this research effort shows the agility of the statistical agencies in responding to current needs of understanding inflation dynamics. These are but a few of the many innovations that have arisen from statistical agencies. Regarding the measurement challenges I mentioned earlier, the examples I just listed have helped observers better track the economy during periods of rapid change or when there are shifts in the structure of the economy, such as increased remote work or the rise of AI, changes to immigration patterns, and supply bottlenecks. A harder nut to crack is declining response rates, but it may be that more integration of private-sector data with official data provides an avenue for addressing this problem as well.20 Seeing Where the Economy StandsI hope my discussion today highlights the tremendous innovation in economic measurement in recent years, supplied by both inventive private-sector data generation and nimble statistical agencies. It is incumbent on economists, researchers, and officials from statistical agencies around the world—many of you who are here today—to be open to new and diverse ways to measure the economy so that this healthy pace of innovation can continue. I want to again stress two things. First, the United States has world-class statistical agencies that have both a long history of rigorously constructing government data sources and adapting and combining information from private-sector with official sources. And, second, private-sector data will continue to be useful for providing granularity, timeliness, and frequency advantages that can complement official statistics, so long as data users are appropriately cautious. Despite the many challenges, the future of economic measurement is bright. The statistical agencies have already proven their ability to innovate and adapt, even under tight resource constraints. And the wealth of private-sector data sources will only expand in the future. When I form my economic outlook and policy assessments, my approach is to watch a wide range of indicators, both official and unofficial, with a focus on the strengths and weaknesses of each. All the data I carefully examine in my current role allow me to better understand where the economy stands. My colleagues on the FOMC and I make determinations on the policy actions that will be most appropriate for achieving our dual mandate, and so I would like to briefly share my views on how I see the economy evolving and how I see appropriate monetary policy. Despite a few bumps at the beginning of the year, inflation has continued to trend down in all price categories. But inflation remains above our target. I do believe that supply and demand are gradually coming into better balance. Supply-side bottlenecks continue to heal, and demand has moderated amid high interest rates and as households' excess savings have depleted. The labor market likewise has seen substantial rebalancing and nominal wage growth moderating as a result—even while keeping up with inflation. Job vacancies and the quits rate have come down from their historically high levels from a couple years ago, and the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio is now back at its pre-pandemic level. On the labor supply side, the increased entry of prime-age workers and immigration have both helped to expand the labor force and compensate for excess retirements we saw during the pandemic. This continued rebalancing suggests that inflation will continue to move down toward our 2 percent target. As I have discussed in recent remarks, if economic conditions continue to evolve in this favorable manner with more rapid disinflation, as evidenced in the inflation data of the past three months, and employment softening but remaining resilient as seen in the past few jobs reports, I anticipate that it will be appropriate to begin easing monetary policy later this year. But my approach to this policy decision will continue to be data dependent and to rely on multiple and diverse sources of data to form my view of how the economy is evolving, especially as upside risks to inflation and downside risks to employment have become much more balanced. If the labor market cools too much and unemployment continues to increase and is driven by layoffs, I would see it as appropriate to cut rates sooner rather than later. Alternatively, if incoming data do not provide confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent, it may be appropriate to hold rates steady for a little longer. As I conclude, I want to thank those of you in this room who do the hard work each day to create and analyze the economic data that allow not only policymakers like me, but also consumers and businesses, to gain a better understanding of ongoing developments in the U.S. economy. And let me thank NABE again for having me. It was a pleasure to speak with you today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, and Office of the Chief Statistician of the United States (n.d.), "Schedule of Release Dates for Principal Federal Economic Indicators for 2024 (PDF)" (Washington: OMB).Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), "Data," webpage.Return to text 4. Both the private-sector data-based measure and the official payroll survey are eventually benchmarked to official data from the BLS. See Tomaz Cajner, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz (2023), "Payroll Employment at the Weekly Frequency,"AEA Papers and Proceedings,vol. 113 (May), pp. 145–50; and Tomaz Cajner, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, John Grigsby, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, Erik Hurst, Christopher Kurz, and Ahu Yildirmaz (2020), "The U.S. Labor Market during the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession (PDF)," BPEA Conference Drafts,Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,June 25, pp. 1–46.Return to text 5. See Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Aaron Flaaen, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz (2022), "Business Exit during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Non-traditional Measures in Historical Context,"Journal of Macroeconomics,vol. 72 (June), 103419.Return to text 6. See Tomaz Cajner, Laura J. Feiveson, Christopher J. Kurz, and Stacey Tevlin (2022), "Lessons Learned from the Use of Nontraditional Data during COVID-19 (PDF)," in Wendy Edelberg, Louise Sheiner, and David Wessel, eds.,Recession Remedies: Lessons Learned from the U.S. Economic Policy Response to COVID-19(Washington: Hamilton Project and Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings), pp.315–346.Return to text 7. See, for example, Aditya Aladangady, Shifrah Aron-Dine, Wendy Dunn, Laura Feiveson, Paul Lengermann, and Claudia Sahm (2016), "The Effect of Hurricane Matthew on Consumer Spending," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2).Return to text 8. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2024), "Household and Establishment Survey Response Rates," webpage.Return to text 9. National income and product accounts (NIPA) data sources are listed in detail in the NIPA handbook; see Bureau of Economic Analysis (2023),Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (PDF)(Washington: BEA, December). Some private-sector data are retrieved by the BEA itself, while others are already incorporated into statistical products the BEA obtains from other agencies. For example, the BEA uses Census Bureau data on construction value put in place to construct estimates of nonresidential structures investment; the Census Bureau, in turn, uses private-sector data on construction starts to build the sampling frame for its construction survey.Return to text 10. The data sources for Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization can be found at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), "Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization - G.17," webpage.Return to text 11. The data sources for Consumer Credit can be found at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022), "Consumer Credit - G.19," webpage.Return to text 12. See Kimberly Bayard, Emin Dinlersoz, Timothy Dunne, John Haltiwanger, Javier Miranda, and John Stevens (2018), "Early-Stage Business Formation: An Analysis of Applications for Employer Identification Numbers," NBER Working Paper Series 24364 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).Return to text 13. See the box "Small Businesses during the COVID-19 Crisis" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020),Monetary Policy Report (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, June), pp. 24–26.Return to text 14. See Census Bureau (2022), "Small Business Pulse Survey: Tracking Changes during the Coronavirus Pandemic," webpage, February 11.Return to text 15. See documentation at Census Bureau (2024), "Household Pulse Survey Technical Documentation: Methodology," webpage.Return to text 16. See Kathryn Bonney, Cory Breaux, Cathy Buffington, Emin Dinlersoz, Lucia S. Foster, Nathan Goldschlag, John C. Haltiwanger, Zachary Kroff, and Keith Savage (2024), "Tracking Firm Use of AI in Real Time: A Snapshot from the Business Trends and Outlook Survey," NBER Working Paper Series 32319 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April).Return to text 17. Other topics with satellite accounts or similar products include arts and culture, outdoor recreation, travel and tourism, household production, marine economy, and coastal areas. Related special topics are covered by the integrated macroeconomic accounts and the integrated industry-level production account (KLEMS). For descriptions, see Bureau of Economic Analysis (2024), "Special Topics," webpage.Return to text 18. See Carol E. Moylan and Sumiye Okubo (2020), "The Evolving Treatment of R&D in the U.S. National Economic Accounts (PDF)" (Washington: Bureau of Economic Analysis, March).Return to text 19. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (n.d.), "New Tenant Rent Index," webpage.Return to text 20. For helpful discussions of traditional and nontraditional data and their potential relationship, see Katharine G. Abraham (2022), "Big Data and Official Statistics,"Review of Income and Wealth,vol. 68 (December), pp. 835–61; and Katharine G. Abraham, Ron S. Jarmin, Brian C. Moyer, and Matthew D. Shapiro (2022), "Introduction: Big Data for Twenty-First-Century Economic Statistics: The Future Is Now (PDF)," inBig Data for Twenty-First-Century Economic Statistics,National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 1–22.Return to text