The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau today jointly adjusted for inflation dollar amounts relating to the availability of customer funds. These changes in Regulation CC include the minimum amount of deposited funds that banks must make available for withdrawal by opening of business on the next day for certain check deposits as well as the amount of funds deposited by certain checks in a new account that are subject to next-day availability. By law, the agencies are required to adjust these dollar thresholds every five years by the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). The inflation measurement period for this adjustment began in July 2018 and ended in July 2023. To help ensure that depository institutions have sufficient time to implement the adjustments, the compliance date for the new amounts is July 1, 2025. Federal Registernotice: Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) today announced a joint public meeting on the proposal by Capital One Financial Corporation, of McLean, Virginia, to acquire Discover Financial Services, of Riverwoods, Illinois. The proposal includes the merger of Discover Bank, of Greenwood, Delaware, into Capital One, National Association, of McLean, Virginia. The purpose of the public meeting is to collect information from a wide range of stakeholders as the agencies evaluate the applications. By law, the agencies are required to evaluate: The public meeting will be held virtually on July 19, 2024, at 9:00 a.m. EDT. Members of the public seeking to present oral comments must register by 12:00 p.m. EDT on June 28, 2024, through the online registration webpage, which will be posted on the Board'sCapital One-Discover Application Reading Roomby May 28, 2024. Further information and requirements to present, as well as registration information to view the public meeting, are available in the attachment from the agencies. Also today, the agencies announced that they are extending the public comment period for the applications to give interested parties additional time to comment. Comments on the applications will now be accepted through July 24, 2024. Federal Register notice
Federal bank regulatory agencies today released a guide to support community banks in managing risks presented by third-party relationships. Community banks engage with third parties to help compete in and respond to an evolving financial services landscape. Third-party relationships present varied risks that community banks are expected to appropriately identify, assess, monitor, and control to ensure that their activities are performed in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. These laws and regulations include, but are not limited to, those designed to protect consumers and those addressing financial crimes. The guide offers potential considerations, resources, and examples through each stage of the third-party relationship and may be a helpful resource for community banks. While the guide illustrates the principles discussed in the third-party risk managementguidanceissued by the agencies in June 2023, it is not a substitute for that guidance. Third-Party Risk Management: A Guide for Community Banks
Federal bank regulatory agencies today jointly issued updated host state loan-to-deposit ratios that are used to evaluate compliance with the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act. Each respective host state loan-to-deposit ratio shows the ratio of total loans in a state to total deposits in the state for all banks that have that state as their home state. These ratios replace those issued in May 2023. By law, a bank is generally prohibited from establishing or acquiring branches outside of its home state primarily for the purpose of acquiring additional deposits. This prohibition seeks to ensure that interstate bank branches will not take deposits from a community without the bank also reasonably helping to meet the credit needs of that community. The updated ratios, including additional information on how they are used to evaluate compliance with the requirements, are availablehere.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Massachusetts Bankers Association Annual Convention, Key Biscayne, Florida I would like to thank the Massachusetts Bankers Association for the invitation to meet with you today.1One of the most enjoyable and informative aspects of my role is the time I spend with bankers, listening to issues that are important to you and that affect you and your customers. Banks play a key role in supporting economic growth and lending to serve their customers and communities, which is an indispensable role in the U.S. economy. Conversations such as ours today help inform my work at the Federal Reserve Board—for my understanding of both the broader U.S. economy and the banking regulatory and supervisory environment. Before our conversation, I would like to briefly touch on the economy and monetary policy. Over the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our meeting earlier this week, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5‑1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. After seeing considerable progress on slowing inflation last year, we have not seen further progress over the first quarter of this year. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation have moved roughly sideways since December and remained elevated at 2.7 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, in March. With annualized 3-month core PCE inflation jumping to 4.4 percent in March, well above average inflation in the second half of last year, I expect inflation to remain elevated for some time. The recent pickup seems to be evident across many goods and services categories, suggesting that inflation was temporarily lower in the latter half of last year. Prices continue to be much higher than before the pandemic, which is weighing on consumer sentiment. Inflation has hit lower-income households hardest since food, energy, and housing services price increases far outpaced overall inflation throughout this episode. Economic activity increased at a strong pace last year and has maintained momentum over the first three months of this year. Although first-quarter growth in gross domestic product was temporarily dampened by volatile categories, such as inventories and net exports, consumer spending on services remained robust, and residential activity and business investment in equipment and intangibles strengthened. Payroll employment has increased at a strong pace through April this year, partly reflecting increased immigrant labor supply. Although we had seen signs of the labor market coming into better balance, recent employment reports show a continued tight labor market, with the unemployment rate remaining below 4 percent, and the number of job openings relative to unemployed workers is still above its pre-pandemic level. Last year, the average pace of job gains slowed, and the labor force participation rate rose. In recent months, however, job growth has rebounded, and labor force participation has flattened out around its peak from last year, suggesting there has not been further improvement in labor supply along this margin, as labor force participation among those aged 55 and older has been persistently low. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance appears to be restrictive, and I will continue to monitor the incoming data to assess whether monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our target. As I've noted recently, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady, but I still see a number of upside inflation risks that affect my outlook. First, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements, including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due in part to immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unclear whether further supply-side improvements will continue to lower inflation. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, including the risk that spillovers from regional conflicts could disrupt global supply chains, putting additional upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices. There is also the risk that the loosening in financial conditions since late last year and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that strong consumer demand for services, increased immigration, and continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. Wage growth has remained at an elevated rate of between 4 and 5 percent, still higher than the pace consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal given trend productivity growth. In light of these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the current state of the economy as well as predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging, and I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a restrictive level, I remain willing to raise the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Thank you, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Pennsylvania Bankers Association 2024 Convention, Nashville, Tennessee I would like to thank the Pennsylvania Bankers Association for the invitation to join you today.1I appreciate the opportunity to engage with you on matters that affect the banking industry. Before sharing my thoughts about the current bank regulatory environment, I will discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy. Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy OutlookOver the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our meeting earlier this month, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, but at a slower pace beginning in June. After seeing considerable progress on slowing inflation last year, we have not yet seen further progress this year. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation have moved roughly sideways since December and remained elevated at 2.7 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, in March. With average core consumer price index (CPI) inflation this year through April running at an annualized rate of 4.3 percent, well above average inflation in the second half of last year, I expect inflation to remain elevated for some time. The recent pickup seems to be evident across many goods and services categories, suggesting that inflation was temporarily lower in the latter half of last year. Prices continue to be much higher than before the pandemic, which is weighing on consumer sentiment. Inflation has hit lower-income households hardest since food, energy, and housing services price increases far outpaced overall inflation throughout this episode. Economic activity increased at a strong pace last year but may have moderated early this year. First-quarter gross domestic product growth was temporarily dampened by volatile categories, like inventories and net exports, and over the past few months, including recent data revisions, consumers appear to have pulled-back on goods spending through April. Still, consumer services spending has remained strong, and residential activity and business investment in equipment and intangibles strengthened. So far this year, payroll employment has increased at a strong pace through April, partly reflecting increased immigrant labor supply. Although we have seen signs that the labor market is coming into better balance, progress has slowed. Recent employment reports continue to show a tight labor market, and the unemployment rate remains below 4 percent, with the number of job openings relative to unemployed workers still above its pre-pandemic level. Throughout last year, the average pace of job gains slowed, and the labor force participation rate rose, but in recent months, job growth has rebounded. Labor force participation flattened out around last year's peak, which suggests no further improvement in labor supply along this margin, as labor force participation among those aged 55 and older has been persistently low. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance appears to be restrictive, and I will continue to monitor the incoming data to assess whether monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our target. As I've noted recently, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady, but I still see a number of upside inflation risks that affect my outlook. First, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements, including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due in part to immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unclear whether further supply-side improvements will continue to lower inflation. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, including the risk that spillovers from regional conflicts could disrupt global supply chains, putting additional upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices. There is also the risk that the loosening in financial conditions since late last year and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that strong consumer demand for services, increased immigration, and continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. Wage growth has remained at an elevated rate of about 4 to 5 percent, still higher than the pace consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal given trend productivity growth. In light of these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the current state of the economy and predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a restrictive level, I remain willing to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Bank Regulatory ReformTurning to the bank regulatory reform agenda, there has been a significant volume of matters that have recently been completed, that have been proposed, and that are in the pipeline. A number of these efforts have been met with criticism and public resistance, from informal comments and ad campaigns to formal legal challenges, including litigation challenging the validity of these reforms. Reasonable minds can disagree on the appropriate path forward for bank regulatory policy, but the current period of regulatory reform feels more contentious than in the past. The current regulatory agenda is notable for its broad scope, both for the institutions that would be subject to reforms, and the nature of the reforms. The proposals touch on a wide range of topics that directly or indirectly impact banks of all sizes. And they often represent significant shifts in regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations. My remarks today highlight two themes related to the significant number of regulatory changes and proposals under consideration. First, the volume and scope of revisions affect a wide range of banking activities and pose significant challenges for all bankers. Reviewing, understanding, and then implementing these reforms will involve bank management, compliance, legal, audit, and even frontline staff. At the same time, banks must also balance the existing and ongoing compliance obligations to meet supervisory expectations. Compliance has always been an important bank function, and it often involves a shared responsibility and obligation across many different business lines and personnel. Simply keeping up with the thousands of pages of new regulatory reforms poses a significant challenge, especially for banks with small staffs and a single compliance officer. Those same staff members, with already heavy compliance responsibilities, are also often best positioned to provide feedback on pending regulatory proposals. Banker comments shared as part of the administrative rulemaking process help inform and influence proposals that are under consideration. If there is a desire to influence change, stakeholders must engage and provide input during this process. Second, the large number of finalized, proposed, and potential changes suggest a lack of prioritization—whether we have effectively identified actual risks to the banking system and devoted resources to the most pressing of these issues. Prioritization is something I have spoken about at length in the past, and it remains just as critical today.2 The banking stress last spring revealed the presence of flaws and shortcomings in our bank regulatory and supervisory framework. A lack of prioritization in our approach risks losing focus on making substantively responsive adjustments and reforms. Opportunities for EngagementReviewing and commenting on regulatory proposals should never be a distraction from a banker's core responsibility to ensure the bank continues serving its customers in a safe and sound manner, and in compliance with applicable laws. So, I do not want any of you to take my remarks today as a call to drop everything you are doing and open up theFederal Registerand start reading. The banking system is a highly regulated environment, and as you see in your work every day, requires banks to devote significant resources to compliance. A strong culture of compliance can help keep your bank safe, and in the aggregate promotes a safe and sound banking system. Within a bank, virtually everyone has a role to play in promoting that culture of compliance with applicable law, all while serving your customers. But stakeholders, including bankers, have an important role in the stewardship of the banking system that goes beyond compliance—namely, participating in the administrative rulemaking process. It is critical that you share your views with policymakers on regulatory reform proposals. All the comments, data, and analysis from commenters enable policymakers to make informed decisions throughout the rulemaking process, from the initial brainstorming stage, through the creation of a proposal, and in crafting a final rule. This feedback is equally critical in understanding how the supervisory process is working as it evolves over time and incorporates new standards and expectations. Information about the intended and unintended impacts of reform initiatives is especially informative. Often, private-sector stakeholders are best positioned to understand and explain these impacts, and to identify gaps in the context, data, and analysis underpinning these initiatives. I recognize that in some instances, multiple, interrelated proposals out for comment at the same time complicate or even frustrate the ability to provide meaningful feedback. For example, the federal banking regulators have proposed significant reforms to capital requirements, while also proposing new long-term debt requirements for banks with over $100 billion in assets. While these efforts are on their face distinct, the calibration of such requirements are directly linked. The calibration of capital requirements is used to set long-term debt requirements. Therefore, these proposals present challenges not only to regulators, but also to public commenters trying to understand the potential and complete impact of reforms. Even so, I strongly encourage your participation to inform the rulemaking process. I will share my views on a few of these proposals, but I certainly do not mean to suggest that this list is exhaustive. All the proposals could benefit from public feedback. Bank Mergers and AcquisitionsSome prudential regulators and other policymakers are currently reconsidering the approach to the review and approval of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&A).3M&A transactions allow banks to evolve and thrive in our dynamic banking system and can promote the long-term health and viability of banks. M&A also ensures that banks have a meaningful path to transitioning bank ownership. The absence of a viable M&A framework increases the potential for additional risks, including limited opportunities for succession planning, especially in smaller or rural communities when zombie banks continue to exist but have no competitive viability or exit strategy. The impact of a more restrictive M&A framework affects institutions of all sizes, including larger institutions that are vying to compete with the very largest global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). They may choose to pursue M&A to remain competitive with larger peers who can achieve that growth organically through their sheer scale. M&A is an important part of a healthy banking system. So, when considering changes to the framework, I think we need to first identify the problem that needs to be solved, and then ask whether any proposed solution is fair, transparent, and consistent with applicable statutes. And critically, whether the proposed solution has the potential to damage the long-term viability of the banking system. Are there identified shortcomings in the current process or standards, and are the proposed reforms targeted and effective to address these shortcomings? One argument I have heard about the M&A regulatory approval process is that the lack of applicationdenialsdemonstrates that regulators are failing to meaningfully review and pressure test proposals and have effectively become a rubber stamp. I think this argument lacks a strong foundation. There is ample evidence that undermines this argument, including the resource demands on institutions of pursuing M&A activity, and the protracted time it takes to complete the regulatory review and approval process (and the not insignificant failure rate we see represented in withdrawn applications). First, we have to acknowledge that choosing the path of a merger or acquisition is not undertaken lightly. These transactions require significant upfront and ongoing investment and commitment of resources. At the outset, this includes finding an appropriate acquisition target, conducting due diligence, and negotiating the terms of the transaction. Once a target is identified, the banks must prepare appropriate regulatory filings, engage with regulators during the application process, and prepare for post-approval business processes including scheduling necessary and costly systems conversions and customer transition. This is an expensive and reputationally risky process that bankers and their boards of directors take extremely seriously. Second, one would expect to see different patterns emerging if regulators were truly acting as a "rubber stamp" for banking applications. We know from data published by the Federal Reserve that filing an application does not guarantee approval, even in the absence of a regulatory denial. The Federal Reserve's most recent report on banking applications activity identifies a significant portion of bank M&A transactions in which applications have been withdrawn.4 The processing timelines we see also seem inconsistent with a process that is operating truly as a rubber stamp. To be clear, I think we have room to do better when it comes to timely regulatory action, while maintaining a rigorous review of applications. But extended review periods are not uncommon, particularly when you include preliminary discussions and pre-filings with regulators in the published processing timelines. Some contemplated regulatory reform efforts will likely make the M&A application process slower and less efficient. One of the key risks to an effective process is a lack of timely regulatory action. The consequences of delays can significantly harm both the acquiring institution and the target, causing greater operational risk (including the risk of a failed merger), increased expenses, reputational risk, and staff attrition in the face of prolonged uncertainty. Reducing the efficiency of bank M&A can be a deterrent to healthy bank transactions—limiting activity that preserves the presence of community banks in underserved areas, preventing institutions from pursuing prudent growth strategies, and undermining competition by preventing firms from growing to a larger scale, effectively creating a "protected class" of larger institutions. Unfortunately, the past year has shown that regulatory attention is increasingly focused on other issues, with the timeliness of regulatory action appearing to be lower on the list of priorities. However, I would like to highlight a change that may have significant impacts on M&A transactions depending on how the requirement is implemented. The Federal Reserve recently proposed changes to its M&A application forms, the FR Y-3 and FR Y-3F, to include a requirement that an applicant submit an integration plan at the time of the initial application.5Many applications often include plans for integration, as this can factor into the consideration of an application's likelihood of approval. However, depending upon how this requirement is implemented, it could result in significantly increased upfront costs and burdens for banks in preparing for and submitting applications for mergers and acquisitions, particularly for smaller institutions. It is important for industry participants to provide comments on changes to the bank merger process—including changes to application forms—especially since cost and timing implications could affect a bank's consideration of these transactions. Ultimately, while banks are mindful of and do plan for integration, I am concerned that increased upfront requirements may lead to additional delays in processing timelines. I would therefore encourage industry stakeholders to review and provide comment on the proposed changes to our applications forms. Third-Party Risk ManagementSimilarly, the agencies also recently released a guide for community banks regarding third-party risk management.6This guide took the agencies nearly a year to finalize after adopting third-party risk management guidance in June of last year. I am hopeful that this community bank guide will be helpful to community banks. But I have yet to be convinced that the guide will effectively reduce the burden on smaller banks to comply with our third-party risk management guidance. Since it is not yet clear that this guide will be effective, I encourage banks to provide feedback on the guide, including on the clarity and transparency of supervisory expectations for community banks in their management of third-party risk. Review of Regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction ActFinally, I'd like to highlight another opportunity for stakeholders to provide feedback on the agencies' regulations. In February, the Board announced the initiation of its review of its regulations to identify those regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or overly burdensome in accordance with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). It is my expectation that this review, and eventually the accompanying report to Congress, will provide a meaningful process for stakeholders and the public to engage with the banking agencies in identifying regulations that are no longer necessary or are overly burdensome. As a part of the comment process, I would encourage the public, particularly community banks, to comment on the aggregate burden imposed on banks since the prior EGRPRA report 10 years ago. While there are many competing priorities on your time, these are valuable opportunities for you to shape the outcome of our regulations. I welcome the opportunity to learn from all stakeholders how the Board and the other banking agencies could reduce burden, especially for regional and community banks. Prioritization within Bank Regulation and SupervisionI would also like to spend a few minutes on prioritization of regulatory actions. In my view, it is essential that regulators appropriately calibrate and prioritize supervisory and regulatory actions. Failing to do so could distract banks, bank management, supervisors, and regulators from focusing on key risks. The frenzy of regulatory reform activity we have seen over the past year raises a question as to whether the banking regulators are pursuing reforms in a prioritized way. Many reform proposals do not appear targeted to identified shortcomings or deficiencies in the existing regulatory framework. While regulators often identify evolving conditions and emerging risks before they materialize as pronounced stress in the banking system, too often regulators fail to take appropriately decisive measures to address them. In addition, regulators can also fall into the trap of getting distracted from core financial risks, and instead focus on issues that are tangential to statutory mandates and critical areas of responsibility. Focusing on risks that pose fewer safety and soundness concerns increases the risk that regulators miss other more foundational and pressing areas that require more immediate attention. Our recent actions suggest this could be the case, and that we have taken steps that could distract bank management from focusing on important and key risks. The Board's focus on climate guidance is one example, but it is not the only example. While climate change is an important issue, climate change is not a core risk to the safety and soundness of financial institutions. The lessons learned from supervisory failures during the bank stress last spring clearly illustrate that bank examiners and bank management should focus on core issues, like credit risk, interest rate risk, and liquidity risk. I am concerned that focusing our regulatory reform and guidance efforts on issues like climate change that do not represent core banking risks will only serve to further distract bank management and supervisors. In addition to issuing interagency supervisory guidance to banks on managing climate-related financial risks, the Board recently issued the results of a pilot climate scenario analysis, which was designed to learn about large banks' climate risk-management practices.7This report goes into significant detail on the technical aspects of the scenario analysis and underlying results. While exploring even remote risks can help build resiliency for the future, I think the report itself included some acknowledgment that these exercises may have limited utility in the short-term for managing risk. For example, the report acknowledges that participants "suggested that climate-related risks are highly uncertain and challenging to measure," and that "[t]he uncertainty around the timing and magnitude of climate-related risks made it difficult . . . to determine how best to incorporate these risks into [banks'] risk-management frameworks on a business-as-usual basis."8Participants also noted that scenario design choices, assumptions, data challenges, and modelling challenges all played a material role in the analysis. Banks already have ongoing obligations to manage all material risks, and while scenario analysis generally is not intended to be predictive, I think the uncertainty and unreliability of the results from this exercise suggest that resources may be better devoted to dealing with more tangible and immediate financial risks. We should rightly be concerned about regulatory pressure on a single issue that could lead to the misallocation of risk-management resources away from risks that may be more material, such as interest rate, liquidity, and cyber risks. Closing ThoughtsWe continue to be at an inflection point in the bank regulatory reform agenda. The pending proposals, including the Basel III capital proposal, the G-SIB surcharge, new long-term debt requirements, amended resolution plan guidance, contemplated changes to the regulatory approval of merger and acquisition activity, and revisions to the interchange fee cap will have a lasting impact on banks of all sizes and their current and future customers. My hope is that you and other interested stakeholders play an active role in this process by sharing your views and concerns with regulators. This input provides valuable insights into the specific impacts—intended and unintended—of changes to the bank regulatory framework. Voicing your concerns enables us to identify, and where needed, address, the real-world consequences of regulatory and supervisory reforms. Without your participation, we cannot fully appreciate the impacts of our regulatory and supervisory changes. Thank you, and I look forward to our discussion. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Michelle W. Bowman, "Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision and Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the New York Bankers Association's Financial Services Forum, Palm Beach, FL, November 9, 2023); Michelle W. Bowman, "Tailoring, Fidelity to the Rule of Law, and Unintended Consequences (PDF)" (speech at the Harvard Law School Faculty Club, Cambridge, MA, March 5, 2024).Return to text 3. Jonathan Kanter, "Merger Enforcement Sixty Years After Philadelphia National Bank" (speech at the Brookings Institution's Center on Regulation and Markets Event, Promoting Competition in Banking, Washington, DC, June 20, 2023); Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Business Combinations Under the Bank Merger Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,"OCC Bulletin2024-4, January 29, 2024; Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Revisions to its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions," news release, March 21, 2024.Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report(PDF), June 1–June 30, 2023, vol. 10, no. 2 (Washington: Board of Governors, September 2023). This report notes that in the first half of 2023, 46 M&A applications were approved by the Federal Reserve, while 12 such applications were withdrawn.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Proposed Agency Information Collection; Comment Request, 89 Fed. Reg. 34,246 (PDF)(April 30, 2024).Return to text 6. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Third-Party Risk Management: A Guide for Community Banks (PDF)," SR letter 24-2 / CA letter 24-1 (May 7, 2024).Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis Exercise: Summary of Participants' Risk-Management Practices and Estimates(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, May 2024).Return to text 8.Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis Exercise, pp. 1-2.Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the American University School of Public Affairs Graduation Ceremony, Washington, D.C. Congratulations, Class of 2024! Let me also congratulate your families, friends, teachers, mentors, and everyone else who believed in you and supported you on the path that brought you here today. Thank you, President Burwell, Provost Wilkins, and Dean Jacknowitz. Before I came to the Federal Reserve, I led the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the University of Michigan for five years, so I am used to addressing public policy graduates in May, wearing a robe, and praying it won't rain for the afterparty. Or in Michigan, hail! It is an honor to be able to join in this celebration of you completing your studies and entering a new and exciting stage of your lives. This is particularly special to me, as later in life my mom went back to school at American University (AU) to earn her master's in education. Today, May 10, would have been her birthday—so I can celebrate your path forward and honor her memory. I had a chance to speak with a few of your classmates last week, and they gave me a window into the passion and commitment that you bring to your work. It is easy right now for some to look at the world and be cynical about the possibility of making it a better place. But in so many ways, the world is a much better place than it was 50 or 100 years ago, in large part thanks to people like you who've gone into public policy. In my personal experience, I've seen many things get better over the course of my professional lifetime. I can see it now in the work that we do at the Federal Reserve. And most importantly, I can see it in each of you. Sometimes, it's easy to look at the government or a large corporation or even the nonprofit sector and see some large, distant kind of entity. But the government is made up of individual human beings. You, your friends and your colleagues, your predecessors here at AU, and the people who will come after you. Those individuals make a big difference. And that's true the moment you leave school. Early on, for example, I worked as a special assistant for Bob Rubin when he was the Secretary of the Treasury. And one of the first things I noticed when he hosted a meeting was that he didn't involve just the top people in the Treasury Department. He included the people who were closer to the issue, such as a research assistant or junior analyst. And he would ask them questions and engage them, and he cared what they thought about the issue. While they didn't necessarily have the same judgment or context as more senior people, they had a lot of knowledge and analytic chops and sometimes a new way of thinking about a problem. And I've carried that approach to my job today. Many of the people in my meetings at the Federal Reserve are quite junior in the organization, but they speak up in a way that can change how I think about a problem. Please know that you can make a difference as a very junior person and in a very large organization. Even if today marks the conclusion of your time in the classroom, it isn't the end of your education. The best career advice that I can offer is also the best advice for a happy life—whatever you do, try to put yourself in a position where you are always learning, every day. This is something my father—a labor lawyer by day and a poet by night—tried to live by. Seeking out a role where you are learning every day will guide you to work that stimulates and motivates you, making you a more knowledgeable and hopefully wiser person, even when the lessons imparted are hard ones. As they often are. This striving to always be learning has guided me to fulfilling work and it has told me, at times, when I needed to take a risk and put myself out there. I was not anyone's first choice for the job I have now, or the job leading the Ford School, or running point on financial reform at Treasury. But I did all of those things. As you will in your lives, when opportunities come along that you never expected. When I was graduating, I had no idea what I would eventually do in life. And that was scary. That is okay. That is normal. You don't need to know what you want to do for the rest of your life. None of us older people know that either. We're figuring it out as we go. I've just mentioned one of the ingredients to doing your best—learning every day and being open to new opportunities even if they are scary—but another more obvious one is effort. It has become more common nowadays to recognize the costs of working too hard, and that is a good thing. But I hope that this emphasis on work-life balance does not deprive you of the satisfaction, and sometimes, joy, that can come from working incredibly hard toward a goal that you find meaningful. Most things worth doing in life are hard. And if you do want to get anything done in the world, you need a team. There's a Michigan saying: "the team, the team, the team," and it's a good one. You can't do things alone. Certainly, the work that I have found most impactful, whether intellectually or to the world, has been with other people. The work I'm proudest of, as an academic, is work that I did with a psychologist and an economist on behaviorally informed financial regulation. In the process, we changed the way each of us thought about crucial questions we were considering. What an amazing gift to be able to do that with colleagues. Along with working hard to achieve your goals, being open to new opportunities, and working as a team, I think it is also important to be tough. Partly, this means being resilient because life is not a continuous march to the top. I've failed many times. There will be criticism and setbacks, and it is how you respond, constructively, to those developments that will matter much more than the progress you make when things are going great. I use the word "tough" because, more than just resilience, sometimes it will be necessary for you to be tough with others. Sometimes you will have to tell colleagues, or even bosses, that they are wrong. Sometimes, you'll have to decide whether to take a stand. And sometimes being tough requires you to be tough with yourself. When you are in jobs like mine, things go wrong all the time. And it's important to understand that when things go wrong, it is your responsibility. It's not somebody on your team's fault. Your team is giving you the best inputs they can. So having the ability to not point a finger at other people, and to point it at yourself, and understand that you are accountable and responsible, is an important part of being a leader. Being tough doesn't mean being hard or insensitive. One can be resilient, make tough decisions, and stand up to pressure in ways that treat people with respect—the kind of respect that you hope others will show you. One of the primary ways that we show respect for others is to listen. If you are always learning, that means you are always listening, taking on board what you hear from others, even if it is very unwelcome, and perhaps, adjusting your views and gaining knowledge from that input. And it means talking in a way that others can hear. One can make tough decisions and hold people to high standards while treating others well. Treating others well, for me, boils down to a simple rule—don't be a jerk. All of us have had enough experiences with others acting like jerks to understand this advice, but it's a bit harder when applied to yourself. At least for me it is. Humility is an attribute that I consider essential to avoid being a jerk. Life often gives one the opportunity to learn and relearn the lesson of humility—and I am humbled every day. Humility is recognizing the limits of knowledge, confidence, and self-regard. It is the line between what we truly know and understand, and what we don't really know and cannot grasp. Humility means being open to new information, to weighing information in an objective way, and being able to take on that input and sometimes change one's mind. In a practical way, it means being open to and seriously considering the views of others, and in that sense, it is often a vital way to connect with other people. Let me leave you today with two words, the most important two words that you will ever know, or ever say. Those words are "thank you." "Thank you" means the recognition that someone has done something valuable for you. Gratitude binds us together. So please turn to your parents, your partners, your friends and other family, your teachers and mentors, your fellow students, and say, thank you. Congratulations, Class of 2024, and thank you, for listening to me today.
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At “Central Bank Communications: Theory and Practice,” a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio IntroductionThank you, Ed, for the kind introduction and for the opportunity to speak.1 You and the organizers of this conference have put together an excellent program on a very important topic, central bank communication, which is key for effective transmission of monetary policy to the economy. To fulfill our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and price stability, it is vital that we make good monetary policy decisions and that we communicate those decisions to the public effectively. Today, I'll do three things. First, I'll discuss the channels that the Federal Reserve currently relies on in its communications with the public. Second, I'll offer a few historical examples of how economic thinking on monetary policy communication has evolved over time. Along the way, I'll highlight how President Mester has contributed to this evolution. And, finally, I'll share some thoughts on the communication challenges that policymakers face. Current Federal Reserve Communication ChannelsCurrently, Fed policymakers communicate often. The Fed publishes a statement after every Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, FOMC minutes three weeks following each meeting, a Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) four times a year, and monetary policy, financial stability, and supervision and regulation reports twice a year. The Chair holds a press conference after every FOMC meeting and testifies in front of Congress on theMonetary Policy Reporttwice a year. Other written communications from the Board and the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, as well as policymakers' speeches, interviews, and other appearances, help inform the public about the Fed's goals and its strategies to achieve those goals. Communication isn't only about talking, it's about listening also. Listening is reflected in our activities. In addition to listening to the steady beat of economic data, the Board and the Reserve Banks conduct numerous surveys of financial market participants, businesses, and families. Some of what we hear is summarized in the Beige Book published eight times a year. And the Fed has many forms of community outreach, includingFed Listensevents where Fed policymakers go into local communities to hear directly from people living and working there. Alternatively, sometimes representatives from communities come to us. For example, earlier this year, I heard from a rancher, a manufacturing consultant, and the head of a nursing school at one of these events. Today, it's widely accepted that clear communication contributes greatly to the effective transmission of monetary policy, especially because clear communication can affect the expected path of interest rates and financial conditions more generally. Loretta, in one of her speeches, describes very well the role of central bank communication: "The public will have a better understanding of monetary policy when policymakers are clear about their policy goals, those aspects of the economy monetary policy can and can't influence, and the economic information that influences their forecasts and policy decisions" (Mester, 2018). She went on to explain that when policymakers are systematic in their policy responses to changing economic conditions, the public will have a better idea of how the Committee's monetary policy is likely to change in response to anticipated and unanticipated economic developments. In particular, she noted: "With such knowledge, households and firms can plan better; they can make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions" (Mester, 2018). The Evolution of Federal Reserve CommunicationsThe view reflected in Loretta's words seems commonplace now, but it wasn't always so. When Loretta joined the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia in 1985, the FOMC didn't disclose its interest rate decisions. It didn't even report that it had made a decision. In 1981, Karl Brunner, the Swiss monetary economist, called central banking an esoteric art and lamented central banks' "inherent impossibility to articulate its insights in explicit and intelligible words and sentences" (Brunner, 1981). At the time, central banking wisdom dictated that monetary policymakers should say as little as possible. Some research of that vintage tried to rationalize this "secrecy" through the notion that monetary policy would be particularly effective if it surprised markets.2 In the 1990s, central bank communication changed dramatically. In 1993, the Fed started to publish FOMC meeting minutes in their current form, and in 1994, it began releasing FOMC meeting transcripts with a five-year lag. In February 1994, the Fed started to publish post-FOMC meeting statements following meetings at which there was a change in the intended federal funds rate. In May 1999, the FOMC started to publish statements after every meeting, even on occasions when there was no change in policy. By then, the move toward greater transparency was fully embraced by Chairman Greenspan, who had once prided himself on "mumbling with great incoherence."3 There were two primary reasons for this change. First, it was thought that greater transparency would demonstrate the Fed's accountability to the public and safeguard its political independence. Second, there was a growing appreciation in the economics profession that clarity about policy could improve macroeconomic outcomes. Expectations became a focal point in academic and policy circles with the emergence of New Keynesian models in the 1990s as a framework for monetary policy. In these models, aligning the expectations of decisionmakers in the private sector with those of policymakers produced superior economic outcomes.4Mike Woodford, one of the developers of the New Keynesian model, put it this way: "Not only do expectations about policy matter, but . . . very littleelsematters" (Woodford, 2005, p. 402). Communicating a policy strategy and following through on it increased the credibility of the central bank and, therefore, its ability to steer expectations and the economy. Clear communication also helped stabilize the economy and keep inflation closer to target because, when the Fed clearly articulated a reaction function, financial markets would be able to anticipate the likely future course of monetary policy and help the central bank do its work by affecting long-term rates and other asset prices. During the tenure of Chairman Bernanke, there was another burst of innovation in the way monetary policy was communicated. In 2007, the first SEP was published to convey systematically the economic outlook of FOMC participants. In 2011, Chairman Bernanke started holding press conferences after every other FOMC meeting. In 2012, the Fed adopted an explicit inflation target of 2 percent and started publishing individual FOMC participants' views on the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate, now famously known as the "dot plot."5During these years, Loretta, in her capacity as the research director at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, contributed to ongoing work on communications, in collaboration with policymakers and Federal Reserve Board staff. Of course, this was an extraordinary time for monetary policy, as interest rates in most advanced economies were close to zero following the Global Financial Crisis. The FOMC employed forward guidance—explicit communication about the future path of the policy rate—as a key tool to deal with the unprecedented situation. The research community had found that such forward guidance could be very effective in the context of the New Keynesian paradigm.6When Loretta became president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in 2014, she supported the continued use of forward guidance during these extraordinary times, in particular to communicate a lower-for-longer policy that could provide accommodation in the presence of the effective lower bound constraint. She also insisted that forward guidance could be used effectively even in normal times as a means of clarifying the FOMC's reaction function. Loretta, as a member of the FOMC subcommittee on communications, developed and advocated for several proposals to improve communications. One proposal was to publish a measure of uncertainty surrounding the SEP forecast numbers. She was concerned that uncertainty could be underestimated by the public if it wasn't communicated. The proposal was adopted, and "fan" charts showing uncertainty associated with the median projections have been a feature of the SEP materials since 2017. Progress toward greater transparency and more effective communication has since continued. For example, since 2019 Chair Powell has been holding a press conference after every FOMC meeting. Researchers at academic and policy institutions have made advances in recent years in measuring the effectiveness of central bank communication. For example, several researchers are now using natural language processing techniques to analyze the impact of central bank communications—including statements, press conferences, speeches, and minutes—on asset prices and economic outcomes.7Another development is the identification of the effect that Federal Reserve policy communications may have on asset prices using high-frequency financial market data. This empirical strategy has allowed researchers to establish new facts. For example, some economists have found that policymaker speeches affect asset prices as much as the information released via FOMC statements and press conferences, and the effects that central bank communications have on asset prices can differ, depending on whether the communication conveys news about the policy rate path or about the economic outlook.8 Communication Challenges Facing PolicymakersAs my brief retelling indicates, we have come a long way. Over the past 30 years, the Fed and many other central banks have embraced transparency and deliberately used their communications as a policy tool. And researchers keep developing better methods to measure and evaluate our communications. At this point, you may be wondering how much longer I am going to talk. And that question leads me to the following one, which is salient for my topic today: Are there limits to the benefits of communication? Surely, sometimes central bank communications can have unintended consequences. Let me give you two examples. First, there is always a risk that policymakers' statements about their economic outlook or their expected future path of the policy rate are interpreted by the public with a false sense of certainty. For example, a data-dependent forward-guidance announcement can be mistaken for a commitment to a fixed path of interest rates. When that interpretation is proven wrong down the road, it can create more volatility and uncertainty than if there had been no announcement. That is why policymakers always make sure to stress the data dependence of future policy decisions. Second, it's also possible that the public misinterprets the views of individual policymakers as a Committee view. The potential for misinterpretation is especially acute when many policymakers speak at the same time and disagree with each other.9The diversity of viewpoints among policymakers lends itself to stimulating debates and, ultimately, better policy. But in such a situation, more communication could increase rather than reduce uncertainty about our policies. I think we stand to benefit a lot from more research in this area. Important questions include, how does the diversity of views among policymakers affect the effectiveness of communications? And, more generally, what distinguishes effective from ineffective central bank communication? ConclusionLet me conclude by repeating what I said at the beginning: To fulfill our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and price stability, we need to formulate good policies and to make sure that our policies are clearly understood. Doing so helps make monetary policy more effective. Therefore, I encourage researchers to continue to address important questions related to central bank communication. Finally, I congratulate President Mester on her outstanding career in the Federal Reserve System and wish her the best of luck in her new adventures. Thank you. ReferencesAcosta, Miguel (2023). "A New Measure of Central Bank Transparency and Implications for the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy,"International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 19 (August), pp. 49–97. Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2006). "Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 38 (October), pp. 1877–905. Brunner, Karl (1981). "The Art of Central Banking," Center for Research in Government Policy and Business, University of Rochester, Working Paper GPB 81-6. Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer (1986). "A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,"Econometrica,vol. 54 (September), pp. 1099–128. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,no. 1, pp. 139–211. Ehrmann, Michael, and Alena Wabitsch (2022). "Central Bank Communication with Non-Experts—A Road to Nowhere?"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 127 (April), pp. 69–85. Gardner, Ben, Chiara Scotti, and Clara Vega (2022). "Words Speak as Loudly as Actions: Central Bank Communication and the Response of Equity Prices to Macroeconomic Announcements,"Journal of Econometrics,vol. 231 (December), pp. 387–409. Goodfriend, Marvin (1986). "Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 17 (January), pp. 63–92. Jarociński, Marek, and Peter Karadi (2020). "Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Information Shocks,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 12 (April), pp. 1–43. Lindsey, David E. (2003). "A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975–2002 (PDF)," Memorandum, Board of Governors Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs. Mester, Loretta J. (2018). "The Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy Communications," speech delivered at the Tangri Lecture at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, January 17. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John Williams (2005). "Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy," in Ben Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds.,The Inflation-Targeting Debate.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 201–46. Swanson, Eric T. (2023). "The Importance of Fed Chair Speeches as a Monetary Policy Tool,"AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 113 (May), pp. 394–400. Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2019). "Central Banking with Many Voices: The Communications Arms Race," paper presented at the 23rd Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile. Woodford, Michael (2005). "Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness (PDF)," inThe Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 25–27. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 399–474. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, for example, Goodfriend (1986) and Cukierman and Meltzer (1986).Return to text 3. Lindsey (2003) provides an extensive account of the history of FOMC communications from 1975 to 2002.Return to text 4. See Orphanides and Williams (2005), among many others.Return to text 5. The document containing the 2 percent inflation target, named the "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," also clarified that the Committee would not set a quantitative target for maximum employment and stated that the Committee would follow a "balanced approach" in promoting both sides of the dual mandate.Return to text 6. Notable early studies include Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Adam and Billi (2006).Return to text 7. Some recent contributions include Acosta (2023), Gardner and others (2022), and Ehrmann and Wabitsch (2022).Return to text 8. See Swanson (2023) and Jarocinski and Karadi (2020).Return to text 9. This "cacophony problem" could be severe if policymakers actively tried to sway market expectations to align with their personal views (Vissing-Jorgensen, 2019).Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Thank you, David. And thank you to the Brookings Institution for hosting me today. I am especially grateful to return to the place where, in my first job as an aspiring economist, I was a research assistant for Alice Rivlin over three decades ago. Today, I would like to talk about the Board's work in pursuit of financial stability, which is critical to the well-being of households, firms, and the broader economy.1Following the financial crisis of 2007–09, a broad set of reforms were put in place to bolster financial stability. To ensure an ongoing focus on that area, the Board established its Committee on Financial Stability as a venue for Governors to discuss related developments and policy issues. I recently became the chair of this committee and will share with you my current views on financial stability and touch on a couple of emerging issues. Enhancing the public's understanding of our work on financial stability is important for the transparency and accountability of our efforts. That is why we communicate our financial stability work prominently in ourFinancial Stability Report,which was most recently published last month and provides more detail on some of the developments I will review today.2 Financial Stability at the Federal ReserveAs the U.S. and global financial system continues to grow and evolve in complexity, the Fed's work on financial stability only becomes more important. A stable and resilient financial system is essential for the Federal Reserve to achieve its dual mandate of maximum-employment and price-stability. Our financial stability work also informs our approach and priorities to the supervision and regulation of banking organizations, our coordination with domestic regulatory agencies, and our engagements with international bodies such as the Financial Stability Board. Financial Stability FrameworkWhen people think about financial stability, they most often recall periods affected by adverse shocks—that is, severe, unexpected events that cause widespread disruptions to the financial markets and, in turn, the broader economy. The challenge is that such events are hard to predict. Therefore, the Fed's financial stability framework focuses on understanding what makes the financial system vulnerable to a whole range of potential shocks and how those vulnerabilities might amplify the effects of those shocks, not on predicting specific adverse events. Review of VulnerabilitiesBased on extensive research and experience, we routinely monitor four broad sets of vulnerabilities to the financial system that could amplify shocks: household and business leverage; the use of leverage by financial institutions; the degree of maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial system, or, in plain English, "funding risk"; and asset valuations and risk appetite. Household and Firm LeverageTo lay out how I am currently thinking about each of these vulnerabilities, I will start with household and firm leverage. A simple measure of whether households or firms are borrowing too much is to compare their debt to the level of GDP, as shown infigure 1. Based on this measure, household borrowing is lower than it has been in many years. Our analysis then dives deeper, including detailed assessments of mortgage borrowing and consumer credit, and this deeper assessment supports the view of a resilient household sector. Nonetheless, we also are attuned to possible changes in this assessment. For example, I am watching closely the rising delinquency rates on auto loans and credit card debt—both of which partially reflect a normalization from recent lows—because they imply increasing household borrower stress, especially among some lower- and moderate-income households. From the figure, you can also see that, looking through the unusual pandemic period, business debt relative to GDP remains above historical norms. Despite this, most firms still have ample earnings to cover their scheduled interest and principal payments. This solid position reflects resilient earnings and the fact that firms with access to bond markets locked in long-term funding during the low interest rate environment of 2020 and 2021. As a result, most firms also appear, in broad terms, resilient to potential adverse shocks. Financial Leverage and Funding RiskLet me turn now to the leverage and funding risk in the financial sector. In assessing these vulnerabilities, we tend to place a lot of weight on the capital adequacy and liquidity of the largest and most interconnected financial firms. Currently, these firms appear well positioned to absorb a shock. For instance,figure 2shows the ratio of common equity tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets—a standard regulatory capital measure—for three groups of banks. This ratio has been increasing for all types of banks lately and, for the largest banks, stands at multidecade highs. The largest banks also have strong funding profiles, owing in part to the strength of the regulatory regime for these banks. Despite the overall resilience of the banking sector, some regional banks experienced large deposit outflows amid the failures of three banks last spring. Conditions have improved considerably since then: Bank profitability remains solid, and deposit flows have stabilized. In addition, as shown infigure 3, most institutions have lowered their reliance on uninsured deposits since the beginning of 2023. We remain attuned to vulnerabilities in this sector. Supervisors are working closely with the set of banks that have experienced outsized fair-value losses from higher interest rates and with banks that have high concentrations of commercial real estate loans. We have varying levels of visibility into the leverage and funding vulnerabilities of other financial intermediaries. While there are some areas of apparent vulnerability, there is also evidence of resilience. Hedge fund leverage is hard to measure, but available data suggest that these funds' leverage is near the high end of its range. Large insurers are well capitalized, but they have been increasing their use of liabilities subject to rollover risk at the same time as they have raised the portion of their assets invested in riskier corporate debt instruments. Money funds have inherent funding vulnerabilities that regulators have been taking steps to address. Reforms adopted by the SEC and coming into force this year will improve funds' liquidity positions and address the structural first-mover advantages among money fund investors that contributed to some of the runs we have seen in this sector over the years. Asset ValuationsLet me turn now to asset valuations. I think it is helpful to consider this potential vulnerability in the context of how a sharp change in valuations could interact with the vulnerabilities I have already discussed. I will start with the classic concern for all of us who lived through the Great Recession: A large decline in asset prices against the backdrop of a weak economy. For example, house prices are high relative to historical benchmarks, likely owing partly to a limited supply of homes for sale. What might the implications be if house prices were to weaken at some future date? The house-price growth we have seen over the past few years has not been accompanied by increased lending or weaker credit standards, as was the case in the early 2000s. The household sector also is much more resilient than in 2006. One way to see this is to run the distribution of risk characteristics we see in the household sector through a constant set of income and house-price shocks.3The stronger underwriting standards that have prevailed since the post-crisis reforms went into place and stronger household balance sheets mean that post-stress delinquency rates should be lower the next time we experience a housing shock. Finally, the financial system is in substantially stronger shape to resist any losses that do occur: The largest banks are subject to stress tests that require them to be able to continue to function through a severe recession, and important structural improvements have been implemented among nonbank entities. Commercial Real EstateNow I will turn to commercial real estate, or "CRE," where the shocks created by the COVID-19 pandemic continue to reverberate. CRE is a broad asset class, encompassing multifamily housing, hospitality, retail, warehouses, office buildings, and many other business properties. Accounting for this heterogeneity is important in assessing the risks associated with CRE. Properties have been differentially impacted by changes in the way many people live, shop, and work. For instance, occupancy rates of suburban medical offices are very different from those of downtown corporate headquarters. Looking at broader trends, values of office buildings have been most affected by lifestyle changes, and values of multifamily properties have also dropped over the past year. These trends present challenges for property owners and lenders, who will need to manage those risks and make appropriate adjustments as the outstanding loans come due. As of the fourth quarter of last year, banks accounted for a bit more than half of the $6 trillion in outstanding debt backed by CRE.Figure 4shows that much of that exposure is in smaller regional and community banks. On average, CRE loans make up only about 5 percent of total assets at large banks but around 30 percent of assets at smaller banks. Those high concentrations have caused us to step up our supervisory work with community and regional banks that have significant CRE concentrations and to augment our regulatory data for this sector. For instance, data available from SEC Form 10-Q filings suggest that office exposures account for a small share of most regional banks' CRE loans.4All told, I view CRE risks currently as sizable but manageable, and I will be paying close attention to the sector in the short and medium run. Private CreditRisks related to CRE are well known to investors and supervisors alike. Another big part of our job is to look for emerging vulnerabilities, and one that has garnered my attention is private debt. Private credit generally refers to direct loans made to businesses, mostly middle-market firms, by nonbank entities such as private debt funds and business development companies. In the U.S., private credit funds' assets under management have grown rapidly in recent years. They were estimated to stand at $1.1 trillion as of September 2023, comparable in size to both the high-yield bond and institutional leveraged-loan markets. History teaches us that rapidly growing lending often involves weak underwriting or excessive risk appetite. The growth in private credit is likely attributable to a confluence of factors. After the financial crisis of 2007–09, private equity investments and leveraged buyouts grew quickly, and demand for credit from middle-market and private equity-sponsored firms grew along with them. Some borrowers appear to prefer private credit deals to bank lending because of easier deal execution and greater contractual flexibility, particularly during the ups and downs of the economic cycle. In addition, the growth of private credit coincided with a period in which stronger bank regulation and supervision were put in place, suggesting that those actions to make banks safer played a role. Overall, I think that the growth of private credit likely has not materially adversely affected the financial system's resilience. Private credit funds appear well positioned to hold the riskiest parts of corporate lending. These intermediaries generally use little leverage and are organized as closed-end funds, which means that investors cannot withdraw the funding supporting the investments. Nonetheless, private credit funds also have growing interconnections with traditional financial intermediaries, including banks. Banks are increasingly originating their own private credit deals—such as through business development companies that are operated or minority-owned by the banks themselves. As a result, I will be monitoring the contribution of private credit to the overall leverage of the business sector and the evolving interconnectedness between private credit and the rest of the financial system. Cyber Risks and Financial StabilityI will conclude with a few thoughts on cyber risk. I should emphasize at the outset that the Federal Reserve's role in managing cyber vulnerabilities is focused primarily on ensuring the institutions we supervise effectively manage the cyber risks they face, including from key technology service providers to those institutions, and safeguarding the resilience of the services provided by the Federal Reserve and the financial system more broadly in the event of a successful attack. We also work with our partners across the government, including the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and with the private sector to understand and address cyber risks. Over the past few years, we have seen an accelerating tempo of cyberattacks from a mix of groups associated with criminal enterprises and hostile governments. While the news sometimes seems dominated by ransomware attacks, we also continue to observe other types of attacks, such as those that seek to uncover information from governments and firms or to carry out or plant the seeds for destructive attacks on information systems that could severely disrupt operations. In response to these risks, we are examining cyber incidents carefully to make sure we have a fuller understanding of how attacks can affect the financial system, including through banks, nonbank financial firms, digital service providers, and critical infrastructure. In this work, we focus heavily on the operational resilience of the institutions we supervise, the service providers used by such institutions, and the financial services provided by the Federal Reserve. We have also begun to incorporate analysis of timely data on firm-level cyber vulnerabilities and interconnections across firms and with service providers to monitor cyber vulnerabilities at the system level. As we contemplate future incidents, my view is that financial resilience can also play a crucial role in mitigating the adverse effects of cyberattacks. Cyberattacks erode the confidence that investors and institutions have in each other and in the financial sector. While strong capital and liquidity positions will not, by themselves, prevent an intrusion, they leave the affected institution in a better position to rejoin the system once the attack is resolved and, most importantly, promote confidence among its counterparties. Moreover, the effects of chaotic markets may impact other institutions that suddenly face losses whose magnitudes might be hard to judge. Well capitalized, highly liquid, and well managed institutions will be best positioned to manage such difficult circumstances. ConclusionLet me conclude by summarizing how we approach the set of issues I have discussed—including systemwide monitoring, CRE and private credit developments, and cyber risks—in our financial stability work. We cannot know the next shock that will test the resilience of the financial system. That is why we focus on the resilience of the financial sector in our regulatory and supervisory work concerning banking organizations and in our engagement with other regulators. We also continuously monitor the financial system and regularly report our assessments in theFinancial Stability Report.Such public communication contributes to the transparency and accountability of our efforts. I hope it also stimulates a public discussion of vulnerabilities to financial stability, as my colleagues and I value the range of views on these issues held across researchers, financial market participants, and the broader public. For this reason, I look forward to our discussion. Again, thank you to the Hutchins Center and the Brookings Institution for hosting me today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2.SeeBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024),Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April).Return to text 3. An example of this kind of analysis can be found in Neil Bhutta, Jesse Bricker, Lisa J. Dettling, Jimmy Kelliher, and Steven M. Laufer (2019),"Stress Testing Household Debt,"Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-008 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).Return to text 4. Regional banks in this context are banks that have between $10 billion and $100 billion of total assets. This information reflects staff calculations based on data collected from a representative sample of individual banking organizations' SEC Form 10-Q filings for the third quarter of 2023.Return to text Accessible version
No content found
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its denial of two rulemaking petitions due to legal and policy considerations. The first petition asked the Board to develop a framework requiring Board-supervised firms to disclose promised financial commitments to certain corporate initiatives, and the second asked for revisions to the Uniform Financial Institution Rating System framework and adjustments to the framework for financial holding company eligibility. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday issued itsEconomic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023report, which examines the financial circumstances of U.S. adults and their families. Overall, the report shows that financial well-being was nearly unchanged from 2022 as higher prices remained a challenge for most households and workers continued to benefit from a strong labor market. The report draws from the Board's eleventh annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which was fielded in October 2023. It analyzes topics including financial well-being, income, employment, expenses, banking and credit, housing, higher education and student loans, and retirement and investments. The report indicates that overall financial well-being was nearly unchanged from 2022. During 2023, 72 percent of adults reported either doing okay or living comfortably financially, similar to the 73 percent seen in 2022 but down 6 percentage points from the recent high of 78 percent in 2021. Despite the moderating pace of inflation, higher prices continued to be a top financial concern. Sixty-five percent of adults said that changes in the prices they paid compared with the prior year had made their financial situation worse, including 19 percent who said price changes made their financial situation much worse. Some groups continued to experience financial stress at higher rates than others. In particular, low-income adults were more likely to face material hardships, including not paying all bills in full, sometimes or often not having enough to eat, and skipping medical care because of cost. Seventeen percent of adults said they did not pay all their bills in full in the month prior to the survey. "The SHED provides valuable insight into the financial conditions of American households," said Federal Reserve Board Governor Michelle W. Bowman. "This perspective continues to help the Federal Reserve better understand how families are coping with the ongoing economic challenges they face." Measures of financial resiliency, including preparedness for emergency expenses and monthly saving, were consistent with the 2022 report. As in the prior year, 63 percent of adults said they would cover a $400 emergency expense using cash or its equivalent and 13 percent would be unable to pay the expense by any means. Forty-eight percent of adults said that they had money left over after paying their expenses in the month prior to the survey, similar to 2022 but below 2021 and pre-pandemic levels. Indicators of workers' opportunities for new positions and pay increases were also similar to 2022. The share of adults who received a raise and asked for a raise remained unchanged from 2022 at 33 percent and 13 percent, respectively. Reflecting the continued strength of the labor market, these measures remained above their 2021 levels. This year's report also discusses topics new to the survey including homeowners' insurance, caring for aging or disabled adults, and childcare. For example, childcare was reported as a significant cost in family budgets. Parents using paid childcare typically spent 50 to 70 percent as much per month on childcare as they did on their housing payment, which is most people's single largest monthly expense. The report, fact sheet, downloadable data, data visualizations, and a video summarizing the report's findings are availablehere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955. Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023 (PDF) Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023Fact Sheet (PDF) Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Interactive Charts
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: First Citizens Bank of Butte, Butte, MontanaWritten Agreement dated May 2, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released results of a survey of senior financial officers at banks about their strategies and practices for managing reserve balances. The Senior Financial Officer Survey is used by the Board to obtain information about banks' reserve balance management strategies and practices, their deposit pricing strategies, and their expectations for potential changes in both the size and composition of their balance sheets. The most recent survey was conducted in collaboration with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York between March 22, 2024, and April 5, 2024, and includes responses from banks that held more than three quarters of total banking system reserve balances at the time of the survey. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected]. Senior Financial Officer Survey (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday released a summary of the exploratory pilot Climate Scenario Analysis (CSA) exercise that it conducted with six of the nation's largest banks. The summary describes how these banks are using climate scenario analysis to explore the resiliency of their business models to climate-related financial risks. Participating banks took a wide range of approaches in this exercise to consider the possible implications of different physical and transition risk scenarios. The exercise highlighted data gaps and modeling challenges that arise when estimating the financial impacts of highly complex and uncertain risks over various time horizons. The banks that participated in the exercise were Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, and Wells Fargo. The exercise was exploratory in nature and does not have capital consequences. Drawing on lessons learned from the exercise, the Board will continue to engage with participating banks regarding their capacity to measure and manage climate-related financial risks. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis Exercise: Summary of Participants’ Risk-Management Practices and Estimates
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested comment on a proposal to expand the operating days of the Federal Reserve Banks' two large-value payments services to include weekends and holidays, so that they would operate every day of the year. Currently, both the Fedwire®Funds Service and the National Settlement Service, or NSS, operate Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Under the proposal, both services would operate every day of the year. The operating hours each day would remain the same, with the Fedwire Funds Service open 22 hours per day, and NSS open 21.5 hours per day. Use of the expanded operating days by service participants, such as banks and credit unions, would be voluntary. The Fedwire Funds Service is a wholesale payment service that allows service participants to send and receive individual electronic funds transfers up to $10 billion. The NSS is a settlement service for participants in private-sector clearing arrangements, such as check clearinghouses, a private-sector automated clearinghouse network, and securities settlement systems. The proposal does not include changes to the Fedwire Securities Service or the Federal Reserve's new retail service for instant payments, the FedNow®Service. The proposal follows feedback from a range of stakeholders on the benefits of expanding the operating days for each service. Providing large-value payment services every day would support the safety and efficiency of the U.S. payment system and help to position the nation's payment and settlement infrastructure for the future. For example, potential benefits of expanding operating days include improving the credit risk and operational efficiency of systemically important financial market utilities and private-sector retail payment arrangements, spurring innovation in new or enhanced private-sector payment solutions, and supporting more efficient cross-border payments flows. On the other hand, it would also require operational and technical changes that would impose costs. The proposal seeks feedback on all aspects of the proposal, including the benefits and potential costs and risks. Comments on the proposal will be accepted up to 60 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Expansion of Fedwire® Funds Service and National Settlement Service Operating Hours Comments:Submit|View
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Texas Bankers Association 2024 Annual Meeting, Arlington, Texas I would like to thank the Texas Bankers Association for the invitation to share my thoughts with you at this year's Annual Meeting.1My remarks today focus on financial stability and the role of banking regulators in promoting financial stability and resiliency in the financial system.2I will also describe principles that are complementary to promoting safety and soundness—to help inform the regulatory and supervisory agenda. Of course, it would be difficult to provide an exhaustive list of the financial stability risks facing the financial system in the time we are together today. So, while I will highlight a few key risks, one must approach this topic with humility, acknowledging that there are limits to a regulator's ability to anticipate every possible financial stability risk in a dynamic and increasingly interconnected world. Financial stability is an important function of the Federal Reserve. Our financial stability function is supported through appropriate monetary policy, bank supervision and regulation, and by monitoring risks in the U.S. and abroad. A stable financial system provides a solid foundation for a healthy banking system and a growing economy that facilitates maximum employment and stable prices. The Fed's recently publishedFinancial Stability Reportdiscusses financial stability risks in terms of interactions between shocks and vulnerabilities. A financial stability shock is an adverse event or series of events that often occur without warning and severely affect the financial system. A financial stability vulnerability includes a specific characteristic of, or activity conducted in, the financial system that can increase the severity of a stress event when a shock occurs.3Since shocks are difficult to predict, the Federal Reserve's monitoring efforts primarily focus on vulnerabilities and the buildup of risks that can accrue over time potentially affecting the resiliency of the financial system. TheFinancial Stability Reportis worth a read. And while I will not recite the many findings of that report today, I will highlight a few of the risks discussed in the report. It is important to keep in mind that the report provides only a snapshot of the current financial stability vulnerabilities and risks. Because the report treats cyberattacks and geopolitical events as shocks, it touches on them only in a cursory way, even though these are important financial stability risks. Instead, the report focuses on key vulnerabilities that are more easily monitored and provides insights into the financial stability outlook as it relates to these factors. While the framing of theFinancial Stability Report—in terms of shocks and vulnerabilities—can be a useful, structured approach to consider this topic, there are many ways to think about financial stability. Often the boundary between shocks and vulnerabilities is a permeable one, and the buildup of risk can become so severe that it becomes a shock. The Federal Reserve plays an important—but limited and non-exclusive—role in proactively addressing financial stability risks and responding to them once they manifest as stress across the system. As I think about the tools we use to address financial stability concerns—and the tradeoffs we are often forced to make when exercising these powers—it is helpful to consider the lessons regulators have learned over time. While the end goal is the same—ensuring resiliency in the financial system to promote financial stability—there are a number of tools that can be used to address the unique characteristics of vulnerabilities and shocks. The Federal Reserve's financial stability monitoring does not operate in a vacuum. To the contrary, our other statutory authorities—including monetary policy or promoting safety and soundness in the banking system—can complement or conflict with the goal of promoting financial stability. Many of these authorities interact with banking activities and institutions that are subject to our supervisory or regulatory authority. In light of this, I will begin by discussing how the use of traditional tools to support safety and soundness—both regulation and supervision—can help promote financial stability. I will then describe the limits of these tools, and then conclude with a brief discussion of some other key financial stability risks. Financial Stability and the Role of RegulatorsThe Federal Reserve plays an important but limited role in promoting the stability of the financial system through resiliency to shocks, and by proactively addressing vulnerabilities. This responsibility can be complemented and supported, or in some cases weakened through the execution of the Federal Reserve's other responsibilities, including monetary policy or the exercise of our emergency authorities. At times, these objectives may appear to present tension or be in conflict. For example, the banking stress last year resulted from a number of underlying causes. But it is clear that trends in the interest rate environment when the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) was rapidly tightening policy to combat inflation were an important factor that contributed to Silicon Valley Bank's (SVB's) failure. The Federal Reserve's documented supervisory shortcomings and the lack of SVB management attention to these risks were also key contributors to the firm's failure. To be sure, the role of monetary policy in the demise of SVB does not excuse SVB's management from its inability to manage the firm's interest rate risk exposures or excuse the ineffective supervisory response that enabled the buildup of the firm's excessive risk. And I am not calling into question the FOMC's monetary policy decisions from that time, which were appropriately focused on our congressionally established mandates of maximum employment and stable prices. Instead, these issues highlight the challenging interrelationships of the various roles and functions of the Federal Reserve. This becomes more complicated when we consider the Federal Reserve's financial stability objectives in the context of its prudential mandates to promote the safe and sound operation of regulated financial institutions. The tools of bank regulation and supervision can promote the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions, but they can also be a positive force when it comes to financial stability. When regulators are successful in their task of ensuring the safe and sound operation of the banking system—one of the core mandates for banking regulators—often there is a corresponding benefit to financial stability. Put another way, if the individual parts of the banking system are healthy, this often promotes the health and stability of the broader financial system. But the goal of promoting bank safety and soundness is narrowly focused within the regulatory perimeter—and the institutions and activities within our regulatory and supervisory authority. By contrast, financial stability must be concerned with the broader financial system, including the multitude of nonbank institutions that play an important role not only in delivering financial products and services, but also in the broader U.S. economy. So today, I'd like to share three principles that can help frame a discussion of the role of banking regulators in promoting financial stability: There is value in our current approach to addressing financial stability risks. We monitor risks and how they build up or manifest as stress in the financial system. And we react in a way that is informed by that monitoring, either to proactively address the buildup of risk, or to address the consequences of events that could threaten financial stability. A review of past events that presented stability concerns can help us evaluate our existing work and inform the direction of future investments. Effective Bank Supervision to Promote Financial StabilityFirst, bank supervision can be an effective and efficient tool to promote financial stability. I think it is helpful to consider commercial real estate (CRE) as an example.4Commercial real estate continues to be an area of focus for both banks and regulators. Some banks have experienced an increase in CRE loan delinquencies, although delinquency rates generally remain low. As we know, one of the factors that has led to CRE stress in certain property types, like office, is the post-pandemic changes in the demand for, and use of, these CRE properties. Should this trend continue, we could see declines in property values, reduced rental income cash flows, or other conditions that could lead to impairment of some banks' CRE loans or portfolios, especially if those loans mature and are refinanced at higher interest rates. I expect we will continue to see material differences in the performance of CRE across the various types of commercial property and in specific geographic regions. This will be due, in part, to variations in regional return-to-office patterns, and the shifting demand for different types of CRE properties. So, what can we learn from this CRE experience? First, supervision can be an effective tool to mitigate vulnerabilities, like the increasing credit risk associated with certain kinds of lending. Underwriting standards and loan-to-value ratios have improved significantly since the 2008–09 financial crisis, and more recently we have seen credit conditions for CRE lending tighten, even as loan demand weakened. I see this as reflecting both better management of these loans and portfolios, and more proactive supervision of material risk.5Banks are also well-equipped to work with their CRE borrowers to mitigate stress, including through loan accommodations and workouts.6Supervision can be particularly effective at addressing well-known, core banking risks, especially when this supervisory work is conducted effectively and without being distracted by non-core risks. Despite the promise of supervision as a tool to promote financial stability, supervision can sometimes fail to address the significant buildup of traditional risk. And supervision can be susceptible to being diverted from core risks to issues of less material concern. For example, take the dynamics that led to the failure of SVB. The buildup of interest rate risk in the banking system was a known vulnerability and material risk, not just for SVB, but for all financial institutions. The responsibility for managing this risk fell on the management team at SVB, just as it falls on every bank that has material exposure to interest rate risk. And yet, the failure of SVB created something of a "shock" event within the banking system, one that led to a vigorous response with the creation of the Bank Term Funding Program and invoking the systemic risk exemption to guarantee all depositors of SVB and Signature Bank. I think it is an oversimplification to point to any one factor as the root cause of the failure of SVB. There were a number of issues that contributed to the firm's ultimate failure. These events included rapid growth, poor risk management, poor public communication, a lack of supervisory attention to core risks, and an insufficiently robust supervisory response to the buildup of interest rate and funding risk. These issues were exacerbated by operational and technological problems with FedWire and discount window lending. The cumulative effect of these issues likely accelerated the firm's failure and increased the scope of the resulting financial harm. But certainly, this is a clear example of where the Federal Reserve's proactive tools—supervision of risk management, and the operation of liquidity support and payment tools—could have been much more effective. Therefore, the virtue of supervision as a proactive measure to support financial stability comes with a cautionary note. Ineffective supervision itself can compound financial stability risks by allowing the buildup of risk without commensurate risk-management measures or supervisory attention. One protective measure that we can take to support effective supervision is to ensure that focus on traditional risks is not lost or diluted. One example of a supervisory and regulatory distraction is from the Fed's recent focus on climate risk. Recently, the Federal Reserve conducted a pilot climate scenario exercise with a subset of the largest U.S. global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and issued guidance to large institutions on managing climate-related financial risk. This regulatory attention and focus on one specific, non-core risk could reasonably call into question whether regulatory priorities are focused sufficiently on key risks. Firms are already required to manage all material risks, and prioritizing climate risk in this way could lead to the misallocation of risk-management resources. Regulatory Approaches to Promote Financial StabilitySecond, where regulation may create or exacerbate financial stability risks, we need to take a close look at whether those risks are justified by the safety and soundness benefits of the regulation. For example, consider the threat to financial stability resulting from market illiquidity. Liquidity is essential to effective market functioning, and liquidity in the U.S. Treasury market is particularly important due to its critical role in the U.S. and global financial systems.7This is an area that, in relative terms, has recently experienced stress events as in the September 2019 repo market stress, and the so-called "dash for cash" in March of 2020. These events raised concerns about the resiliency of U.S. Treasury markets. Even today, some indicators signal low market liquidity through market depth in U.S. Treasury cash markets, which have been at levels below historical norms.8 Banks play an important role in providing liquidity, and there are clear signs that liquidity in Treasury markets is low.9While there may be a number of reasons for reduced Treasury market liquidity, I would note two specific factors and ongoing risks: (1) concerns by banks about balance sheet capacity to engage in low-margin market activities, and (2) the cumulative regulatory burden on banks when they engage in market-making activities, which includes most recently the proposed increase in capital costs for market making activity proposed by the Basel III endgame rulemaking, and an apparent lack of interest in addressing the constraints on bank activities caused by bank leverage ratios. Ultimately, liquidity in the U.S. Treasury market has the potential to amplify or dampen shocks to the financial system. Where we can take proactive regulatory measures to ensure that primary dealers have adequate balance sheet capacity to intermediate Treasury markets in times of stress, we should do so. This could include amending the leverage ratio and G-SIB surcharge for the largest U.S. banks. And where we can take into consideration the impact of regulatory reforms on financial stability, we must at least acknowledge the tradeoffs and the potential downside risks that regulatory changes could create. This is particularly important when considering significant increases to capital requirements, especially those of the scale contemplated by the Basel III proposal, including the market risk capital increases. Adopting regulatory changes to mitigate these concerns may not be sufficient to promote market liquidity, but it would be an important step toward building resiliency in advance of future stress events. In my view, it would be better to fix the roof now, while the sun is shining, by addressing over-calibrated leverage ratio requirements and moderating capital increases for the Basel III proposal. Unintended Consequences of Overregulation and Disproportionate SupervisionFinally, as we evaluate the merit of regulations and supervisory approaches, we must understand the broader implications beyond the regulatory perimeter. We have seen a migration of activity out of the regulated banking sector to a variety of alternative service providers and nonbank financial institutions and intermediaries. As theFinancial Stability Reportnotes, hedge fund leverage reached 18 to 1 in the third quarter of 2023 for "average on-balance sheet leverage of the top 15 hedge funds by gross asset value."10Throughout 2023, banklendingto nonbank financial institutions—a category that includes hedge funds—also increased.11While this increase was accompanied by continued declines in delinquency rates for bank lending to nonbank financial institutions, I think it is worth considering how this activity could ultimately bleed back into the regulated banking system.12 We should also consider structural shifts that have potential implications for financial stability. In shaping the bank regulatory framework, we must acknowledge that regulation and supervision already influence the location of activity and will continue to do so. We also know that the cost of bank regulation, including bank capital requirements, influenceswhereactivities occur, either within the banking system or in nonbank entities outside of the regulatory perimeter. Absent other factors, over time the cost difference of providing a service between a bank and nonbank provider will lead activity to migrate to the lowest cost provider. Just as with the residential mortgage market, these shifts have real consequences for where activity occurs. Therefore, the threshold question we need to ask is whether regulation and supervision are appropriately calibrated to risk over time. Ultimately, even if regulation and supervision are rigorous—imposing higher standards on banks than on nonbanks—this does not necessarily mean that the standards applied to banks are not appropriate. It may be that activity conducted by nonbanks lacks appropriate supervision and regulation. Imposing the same level and type of regulation and oversight on activity that occurs outside of the banking system is beyond the scope of bank regulatory authority. However, we must be careful not to facilitate the transfer of activity and risk out of the banking system simply by imposing standards that are disproportionate to risk for the same activities that are conducted by banks. The same activity presenting the same risk should receive the same regulation. Same activity, same risk, same regulation. Striking the right balance and calibration for the regulation of specific activities is not always a simple task, nor is the establishment of expectations that accompanies regulation and supervision always subject to scientific precision. That being said, one does not need to look any further than the proposed Basel III endgame capital rules to find reforms that are excessively calibrated and disproportionate to risk. This proposal contemplated a 20 percent increase in risk-weighted assets across bank holding companies subject to the rule. Public commenters raised significant concerns that the limited analysis included with the Basel III proposal may have significantly understated the scope of the capital increase. In response to this concern, the Board launched a data collection to gather more information from banks to better understand the impacts of the proposal, the results of which will hopefully be released soon. As I have discussed in the past, if implemented as proposed, the effects are predictable: higher costs of capital for banks, higher costs of services for customers, less availability and narrower selection of services, and increased concentration in the providers of financial products and services.13Driving risk out of the regulated banking system could lead to marginal improvements in bank safety and soundness, but the consequences for financial stability could be severely adverse. As I noted above, we have already seen reduced market activity driven by the leverage ratio and other regulatory constraints on bank balance sheets. We have also seen banks tighten credit standards and reduce lending activity, which often leads to a credit "gap" left to be filled by nonbank lenders. As activity and risk migrates from the banking system to nonbanks, we should ask how these shifts will impact financial stability over the long run, even though we have less visibility and insight once they leave the banking system. The Basel III capital rules are only a subset of regulatory proposals for change that involve the challenging task of achieving the right calibration to risk over time. A glut of new bank regulatory reforms and supervisory guidance raise this concern, including revisions to the G-SIB surcharge, new long-term debt requirements, amended resolution plan guidance, contemplated changes to the regulatory approval of merger and acquisition activity, and revisions to the interchange fee cap. The cumulative effects of these regulatory proposals are significant. This cautionary note does not mean that I am opposed to appropriate reforms to bank regulation and supervision—both tools must adapt to changing conditions and risks. Last year we saw significant stress in the banking system due to a few bank failures and the persistence of higher inflation and interest rates in the U.S. and in many other countries around the world. But we should not assume that "more" is always better. More regulation and more supervision are only effective if the changes are targeted to address an existing problem and are appropriately focused and efficient.14When they are targeted and efficient, they may result in a net positive both in bank safety and soundness, and in financial stability. The function of bank regulators is not to create a bank regulatory framework that eliminates risk. Banking is inherently about managing, not eliminating, risk. ClosingMy remarks today are not meant to be an exhaustive list of all the financial stability threats facing the U.S. banking system, but I would be remiss in concluding without briefly mentioning a few other key financial stability risks, all of which I expect are familiar to you. First, monetary policy and the fight against inflation. This is a key risk identified in theFinancial Stability Report, and in surveys of bankers. When effectively implemented, monetary policy promotes price stability and maximum employment. In the long run, achieving both of these objectives promotes the stability of the broader financial system. It is of utmost importance that we maintain credibility in pursuing our fight against inflation by proceeding carefully and deliberately to achieve our 2 percent goal. But we cannot ignore the fact that monetary policy can present risks to the banking system and the broader financial system. Changes in interest rates can make it more difficult for banks to manage interest rate risk, particularly in the face of rapid rate increases like those from 2022 and 2023. We know that many banks have seen a significant increase in unrealized losses on their balance sheets, a trend that has led to pressure on liquidity, funding, and capital for some institutions. While monetary policy mandates may support long-term financial stability, monetary policy is an independent function that may heighten short-term stresses in the banking system. Our supervisory activities should reflect an awareness of these effects on bank management decisionmaking as we rely on regulation and supervision to promote resilience in the regulated banking system, with the goal of helping banks as they navigate an evolving macroeconomic environment and adjust to major shifts in the stance of monetary policy. Today's banking system has also been heavily shaped by the effects of COVID-related stimulus on deposit activity. Many banks saw a significant inflow of deposits as a direct result of COVID-related stimulus with excess savings accumulating due to lockdowns. This trend created challenges for banks, who may have lacked sufficient opportunities to invest or extend credit in a world affected by COVID lockdowns. The rapid increase in deposits in the banking system, and their subsequent drawdown, have pressure tested banks' abilities to manage funding and interest rate risks, and posed significant challenges for banks faced with few opportunities to put funding to productive use. While there are important pockets of financial stability risk where the Federal Reserve lacks authority, there are meaningful improvements that can be made to our regulatory and supervisory approach that could enhance financial stability. Bank regulation and supervision can best accomplish their goals when guided by transparency, fairness, and efficiency. We must remember that there are always consequences to financial stability from miscalibrated regulatory and supervisory actions and the cumulative effects of regulatory proposals. I hope my discussion today has helped to highlight the role of financial regulators in promoting financial stability, through (1) applying supervision to mitigate and promote resilience to financial system vulnerabilities, (2) adopting bank regulatory approaches that further financial stability goals, and (3) taking into account the unintended consequences and tradeoffs of overregulation and disproportionate supervision—particularly as they may result in negative consequences. Of course, while these principles are helpful guides to how regulators can best promote financial stability, they are also insufficient. We must be thoughtful about the limits of regulatory authorities—and abide by those limits, even in the face of significant stress. The Federal Reserve and the bank regulatory framework do not hold the solution to every financial stability problem, and we must have confidence that other regulators, and other branches of government, will take appropriate steps to preserve financial stability when needed. Thank you for your time today, and I look forward to our discussion. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Michelle W. Bowman,"Financial Stability in Uncertain Times," (PDF)(speech at The Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee and Policy Center for the New South Marrakech Economic Festival, Marrakech, Morocco, October 11, 2023).Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Financial Stability Report(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April, 2024).Return to text 4. See Financial Stability Report, 11–12.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,April 2024 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (PDF), Questions on commercial real estate lending section (May 6, 2024).Return to text 6. See Supervision and Regulation Letter 23-5,"Prudent Commercial Real Estate Loan Accommodations and Workouts," (PDF)June 30, 2023.Return to text 7. See Financial Stability Report, 9–10.Return to text 8. Figure 1.11 inFinancial Stability Report, 10.Return to text 9. See Financial Stability Report, 9–10.Return to text 10. Financial Stability Report, 31.Return to text 11. Financial Stability Report, 33.Return to text 12. Financial Stability Report, 34.Return to text 13. See Michelle W. Bowman,"The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform" (PDF)(remarks at Protect Main Street, sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C., January 17.Return to text 14. See Bowman, "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform."Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At Georgetown University, Washington, D.C. (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you, Dean Treanor, for the invitation to speak here today. I am very sorry that circumstances prevent me from joining you in person. I will start by acknowledging the parents, spouses, partners, other family members and mentors who are here. Without your support, sacrifice, and encouragement, we would not have so much to celebrate today. And to the class of 2024—congratulations on earning your law degree. You are the most selective class in Georgetown history, chosen from 14,000 applicants, and the most well qualified as well. Among you are Fulbright scholars, military veterans, Peace Corps, AmeriCorps and Teach for America alumni, student athletes, accomplished musicians and even a medical doctor. An impressive group. This is also the most diverse class in the 154-year history of the school. I am especially proud today to say that there is a lot of Georgetown in my family tree. My father graduated from the College in 1943 before serving in the U.S. Army in World War II. After the war, he received his law degree here and practiced law in Washington, D.C. I am fortunate to have two wonderful daughters; one graduated from the College in 2012; the other is a member of the Class of 2026 at the Law Center. It seems like yesterday that I was in your shoes, receiving my degree, looking forward with optimism and excitement, and wondering what lay ahead. I cannot help but think fondly of my time here. For many years, friends from law school have gathered annually for a weekend to refresh our ties and laugh about times gone by. These gatherings are referred to as "Big Chill," a reference to a 1983 movie that revolved around a mid-life reunion of college friends. I made lifelong friendships here that I keep to this day, and I hope it will be the same for you. Along with all the hard work, I also remember the fun. A favorite tradition was to attend Saturday midnight showings ofThe Rocky Horror Picture Showat the Key Theater on Wisconsin Avenue in Georgetown. Now, if you have led a culturally deprived life and are tragically unfamiliar with the movie, it is a raucous musical starring a young Tim Curry. Everyone in the theater would sing along, shout out the lines, and throw popcorn at the screen; many would dress up like the characters. Now, I didn't dress up—sorry to disappoint you—but no party was complete until all of us danced "The Time Warp" to the movie's famous song. As it happens, I still remember the steps, and I had intended to demonstrate the Time Warp for you, but that will not be possible today. Instead, I will offer a few thoughts that I might have benefited from hearing when I was sitting in your chairs a mere 45 years ago. Embracing ChangeThe years since my graduation have brought waves of fundamental change to the workplace and to society at large, much of it driven by technology. Imagine a world with no internet, no email or texting, no personal computers or cell phones, no social media. Some of you parents are no doubt thinking: I would be fine with that world! The pace of change will likely continue to be very fast. Be alert to the ways your working life may change. Think about how you can be prepared for those changes and to turn them to your advantage, and to society's advantage. The practice of law has been transformed over the years; if you do choose the path of a practicing lawyer, I would think about what practicing law could look like in 10 or 20 years. In a world that will continue to evolve quickly and in unexpected ways, you will need to be agile. Embracing change and taking risks can be an important part of your development as a professional and as a person. Your formal education may end today, but you are not done learning. Many of the important things you will need to know can only be learned through experience. And experience can be a hard but irreplaceable teacher. As an example, near the end of my second year here, it was time to select the next editor in chief of theGeorgetown Law Journal. I thought that there were plenty of colleagues who were better qualified, but who simply did not want the job. So, with much trepidation, I put my name in. I was secretly, but utterly, terrified that I might be chosen. And amazingly enough, I was. What now? It turned out that, as I feared, I was not well prepared for that responsibility. I had to keep people interested and motivated enough to work on theJournalwhen many things competed for their attention. I had to have a plan for the organization and not just for myself. I had to do this while exhibiting confidence that I did not feel. My main memory of that time is thinking, "This is harder and far different from what I had expected!" What I now know is that almost no one is ready for their first leadership roles. When you step into a leadership role, it is very common to doubt yourself. If I could tell my younger self something, it would be to believe in yourself and put yourself in situations in which you will be seriously challenged to do new things. Assume that you will make mistakes. Learn from those mistakes; do not dwell excessively upon them in regret. You will fall down. Get up. Repeat cycle. The more you do that, the more you will learn and the faster you will develop as a person and as a leader. Know also that, in my experience, there is no single model of a successful leader. Each of you has it in you to lead successfully. No One PathOne of the great things about your legal education is it sets you up for success on a wide variety of potential paths. I left the practice of law a few years after I left this school. But my legal education has benefited me all along the way. Studying law teaches you to think clearly, analyze thoroughly, and understand all sides of an argument. The possibilities that lie ahead of you are extremely broad. You may work for a single law firm for your entire career. Or you may leave the law fairly soon, as I did, and never look back. You will always benefit from what you learned here. The fact is, I do keep a copy of the Federal Reserve Act that I consult often. Like many of you, I imagine, I knew that I wanted to do public service. As I left law school, I remember thinking about people like George Shultz and Cyrus Vance, prominent figures of the day who had successful private-sector careers and served periodically in government. The head of the investment bank in New York where I worked as a young man was Nicholas F. Brady, who had an extraordinary career in investment banking and had served as a U.S. senator from New Jersey as well. I was the most junior of employees, but I wanted to introduce myself and tell him about my own aspirations. But approaching him was daunting. Maybe he would decline to meet with me. Maybe he would think I was not committed to the firm if I told him I was interested in public service. I finally summoned the courage to present myself at his office. I told him that I grew up in Washington, had been a federal law clerk and a congressional staffer, and wanted to do public service along the way. I said that if you need someone to staff you on anything you do in Washington, I'm your guy. He said something along the lines of, "Great, thanks." I then crept back down the stairs to my broom closet of an office wondering whether that was going to matter. A few months later, I got a call from his secretary. I can still hear her gravelly voice. "Can you come up and see Mr. Brady?" When I got there, he said, "I need you to help me out with this thing." This thing was defending an oil company from a hostile takeover attempt by a colorful corporate raider of that era named T. Boone Pickens. I ended up spending months going back and forth from New York to Washington with Nick. A few years later, Nick Brady became the Treasury Secretary. Nick asked me to join him at Treasury, which opened the door for me to higher levels of public service. The point is this: if I had not forced myself to get up from my desk, taken the stairs up to the 15th floor, and presented myself to his office that day, the rest of my life would have been very different, and I would not be standing here today. Mustering that little bit of initiative changed my life. A little initiative can make all the difference in anyone's career. ConclusionI will conclude by encouraging you to think beyond yourselves. Each of you has the capability to achieve success in any field you choose; it is important that you also consider how to give back and use your gifts to make a difference. Reflect on the motto of this school: "law is but the means; justice is the end." Many of you have served at law clinics where you stood up for underrepresented individuals and organizations. And many of you will play important roles in the military, at nonprofits, and in governments around the world. Each generation has an obligation to move us closer to the ideal, as embodied by the famous image of blindfolded Lady Justice holding the scales. You should count yourselves among the luckiest in all our society to graduate from this institution, to have the support of loved ones through three grueling years, and the health and other good fortune not to get tripped up along the way. Several years ago, one of my predecessors, Ben Bernanke, said, "Those who are the luckiest . . . also have the greatest responsibility to work hard, to contribute to the betterment of the world, and to share their luck with others." I cannot improve upon that. I thank you for having me. Georgetown will always hold a special place in my heart. Thank you again to Dean Treanor and all the faculty, and the hardiest of congratulations to the Class of 2024.
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Expanding Access to Capital for CDFIs event, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Thank you, Jack. And thank you to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for hosting this timely event. It is good to be back at the New York Fed where I conducted research on financial institutions as a dissertation fellow over two decades ago. Your recent research on the Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) industry is a welcome prelude to today's conversation. A lot of thoughtful, interesting research is also being produced by other Reserve Banks on this topic, some of which I will highlight today. Let me start by saying it is a great honor for me to be among those doing this important work every day. You help to encourage and strengthen the financially and economically vulnerable, and to create economic opportunity that benefits them and our broader economy. CDFIs are a subject I know something about, and care about a great deal. I personally know the impact these financial institutions have in communities, having previously served on the board of Rende Progress Capital, a CDFI in Grand Rapids, Michigan. It is also wonderful to see that many more Americans are becoming aware of CDFIs. A CDFI in Arkansas, People Trust, was featured in the 2023 short film "The Barber of Little Rock." That documentary was nominated for an Oscar at this year's Academy Awards. In the film, the founder talks about how the People Trust name is inspired by potential borrowers, some of whom had been turned away by other institutions and want to prove they are trustworthy, creditworthy, and able to run successful businesses. It is exciting to see the stories of CDFIs reaching new audiences in such an auspicious way. CDFIs are having a moment off the silver screen, too. A significant portion of the federal funding directed to community development activities during the height of the pandemic flowed through CDFIs. These investments exemplify how CDFIs can meet increased demand while managing rapid growth through expanded capitalization.1Addressing the funding needs of CDFIs has also helped to elevate awareness of the critical services these institutions provide. Today, I will speak about the crucial role CDFIs play in their communities, the challenges they face in a rapidly changing landscape, the innovations they are adopting to overcome these challenges, and the support the Federal Reserve gives to this important industry. Why Are CDFIs Important?As all of you in the room know, CDFIs represent a range of institution types, including banks, credit unions, loan funds, and venture capital funds. They provide loans to entrepreneurs to start or expand businesses, families to purchase their first homes, healthy food retailers to operate in food deserts, community health centers to service low-income communities, and they also support many other community and economic development activities. Termed by some as "financial first responders," CDFIs have the creativity, mission, and funding structures to respond to needs through customized products and services for the people and communities they serve. CDFIs are a critical source of financing for organizations working on the front lines of community development. They reach households, individuals, businesses, and civic organizations that might otherwise be underserved—as compared with the level of attention, favorable terms, and assistance offered by CDFIs—or even unserved by traditional financial institutions. In the current interest rate environment, where financial institutions have generally tightened credit, CDFIs are especially important for those borrowers who benefit from the flexible underwriting and terms they offer. These institutions also provide other important services that complement their loan offerings. For example, they often require clients to participate in assistance programming, such as credit counseling, homeownership counseling, or business coaching, before receiving loans. As a result, many of these institutions serve as financial literacy educators, and provide support for new entrepreneurs. CDFIs often continue their work with borrowers even after loans are made, for example, by helping them through rough spots, should borrowers experience difficulty repaying loans. They leverage their relationships to help their borrowers grow and thrive. These capacity-building efforts and technical support were particularly important during and immediately following the pandemic, when there was a historic surge in new businesses formed in the U.S. When speaking about CDFIs, it is essential to highlight whom they serve and where they work. CDFIs frequently work with historically underserved populations and communities. Roughly 20 percent of CDFIs are headquartered in counties with persistently high poverty rates, and 40 percent are located in communities of color.2For example, research from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas indicates that mission-driven financial institutions, including CDFIs, provided more Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans to borrowers in low- and moderate-income communities and majority-minority communities than their traditional counterparts.3 Growth in Demand for CDFI Products and ServicesTherefore, it is encouraging to see that the industry is growing both in terms of number of certified CDFIs and total assets held. From 2018 to the start of 2023, the number of certified CDFIs rose 40 percent and assets have nearly tripled, according to research from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.4 Interest in CDFI products and services also continues to grow. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's 2023 CDFI Survey indicates that nearly three-quarters of CDFI respondents experienced an increase in demand for their products from 2022 to 2023.5CDFIs are especially adept at leveraging capital—with some programs leveraging $8 in private-sector investment for every $1 of public funding.6That leverage helps meet this growing demand. Despite growth in demand, many CDFIs still face challenges in today's economic environment, especially as it relates to meeting the needs of the communities they serve. I emphasize that the communities CDFIs serve are ones that were disproportionately impacted by business and school closures as well as negative health outcomes resulting from the pandemic. They also have been among the most affected by recent inflation. I would like to highlight three specific issues that CDFIs are struggling with, as identified by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's CDFI survey. First, demand is outpacing the supply of capital. While there has been an influx of federal funding for CDFIs, much of that is tied to pandemic-related relief programs and other programs with specific purposes. Therefore, building out long-term sources of capital is a continuing challenge. One hopeful strategy is selling loans on secondary markets. New research from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York shows that CDFIs sell billions of dollars of loans each year but tend not to do so systematically. Also, residential mortgage loans account for almost all the volume sold by CDFIs. As such, there is likely substantial room for growth.7Later in today's program, you will hear more about opportunities for CDFIs to explore options, such as pooling and securitizing loans to expand their access to capital markets as well as further developing the secondary market for loans backed by other collateral types aside from residential mortgages. Second, the increasing cost of lending capital makes extending affordable credit to their low- and moderate-income borrowers more difficult. Third, CDFIs are not immune to the challenges associated with hiring and retaining staff, and managing labor costs, that are faced by many employers in a tight job market. How the Federal Reserve System Supports CDFIsThe Board and regional Reserve Banks have long understood the unique value of CDFIs. CDFIs are key partners to our Reserve Bank Community Development programs and integral members of our Board and Reserve Bank Community Development Advisory Councils. We rely on the insights they share with us to understand how low- and moderate-income communities are faring in the economy. The Fed also supports CDFIs through certain supervisory and regulatory activities, including through evaluation of compliance with the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Among other provisions, the CRA allows banks to receive CRA credit for undertaking community development activities in cooperation with CDFIs. As mentioned, CDFIs were key providers of PPP funding in low- and moderate-income communities during the pandemic. The Federal Reserve's PPP Liquidity Facility created more opportunities for banks and CDFIs to leverage funding in our most vulnerable communities impacted by the pandemic.8In addition, the Fed clarified the capital treatment of funds made available through the Emergency Capital Investment Program, and provided technical assistance throughout the application process. Another key area of the Federal Reserve's support for CDFIs is research, which is an area of interest for several of the Reserve Banks. In particular, I would like to take a moment to acknowledge the stellar research efforts of our host, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, related to the growth of the CDFI industry and the origination and sale of loans by CDFIs. The latter was the impetus for today's event. I hope this research will facilitate more conversations and serve as a resource for the industry as CDFIs and those who support them consider how to increase liquidity to meet demand. And of course, gatherings like today's event are another component of our role in supporting CDFIs: Bringing together thought leaders to share information and ideas with the goal of advancing the work of CDFIs. ConclusionIn closing, the CDFI industry has been a critical source of responsive, flexible capital and technical assistance for people and places most in need. Recent investment in CDFIs positions the industry to leverage new capital to deliver a greater impact in the communities they serve. I am pleased to see the meaningful work the CDFI industry has accomplished and eager to see the creative innovation and impactful outcomes of the CDFI industry. And in my role here at the Federal Reserve, I am proud of the many ways the entire System has supported the timely and important work of CDFIs. I look forward to continuing this vital partnership. Thank you. 1. Seehttps://www.consumercomplianceoutlook.org/2022/first-issue/overview-of-community-development-financial-institutions.Return to text 2. U.S. Department of the Treasury, "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on $1.25 Billion Award to CDFIs to Support Economic Relief in Underserved Communities Affected by COVID-19," news release, June 15, 2021.Return to text 3. Emily Ryder Perlmeter, "Mission-Oriented Banks in Texas and Underserved Businesses: Lessons from the Paycheck Protection Program" (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, December 16, 2022).Return to text 4. Jacob Scott, Maria Carmelita Recto, and Jonathan Kivell, "Sizing the CDFI Market: Understanding Industry Growth" (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2023).Return to text 5. Surekha Carpenter, Nick Haltom, Sierra Latham, Stephanie Norris, Hailey Phelps, and Kai Amado, "2023 CDFI Survey Key Findings" (Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, August 30, 2023).Return to text 6. U.S. Department of the Treasury, "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on $1.25 Billion Award to CDFIs to Support Economic Relief in Underserved Communities Affected by COVID-19," news release, June 15, 2021.Return to text 7. Jacob Scott, Maria Carmelita Recto, and Jonathan Kivell, "Examining the Origination and Sale of Loans by Community Development Financial Institutions" (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May 2024).Return to text 8. "Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF)," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, last modified April 11, 2024.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At The Digital Chamber DC Blockchain Summit 2024, Washington, D.C. I would like to thank the Digital Chamber for the invitation to share my perspectives on innovation in the financial system.1I welcome opportunities like this to engage in discussions that include both the public and private sector on this important topic. These conversations help inform my understanding of and expectations for how technology can enhance financial services in a manner that is consistent with operating in the highly regulated banking industry. Today, I will share my views on evolving financial technology and the importance of ongoing, responsible innovation, including the roles of both the public and private sectors in shaping the future. In my role at the Federal Reserve, I view financial innovation through the lens of the central bank's responsibilities—issuing U.S. currency; conducting monetary policy; fostering a safe and efficient payment system; maintaining financial stability; promoting consumer protection; and supervising and regulating financial institutions. Regulators often espouse the benefits of innovation—innovation can lead to greater efficiency, and it can promote competition in the market, which can lower the cost and expand the availability of products and services to consumers and businesses. While regulators acknowledge these benefits, innovation is inevitably accompanied by risk. Innovation can exacerbate traditional financial risks or introduce new risks that must be carefully understood and managed. And on a basic level, the "newness" of innovation often leads regulators to reflexively resist these changes, whether the change takes the form of new technology, new ways of delivering products and services, new financial infrastructure that underlies how the banking system works, and new relationships within the financial system and beyond. So how do regulators get comfortable with innovation? Some attending today may answer that "they don't!" And I am sure that some here in the room have experienced this friction in trying to pursue innovation in a heavily regulated environment. In fairness, sometimes "no" is the correct regulatory response when innovation either does not solve an actual problem, or simply cannot be executed in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with applicable laws. But my goal today is to propose some building blocks that could help regulators get to "yes" more often, and potentially smooth the rough path to successful innovation in the banking system. Understanding InnovationAs a first principle, I would offer "understanding" as a necessary predicate to promoting innovation. Before we craft a useful public policy around innovation in banking, we need to understand the various dynamics involved with particular innovations. We must consider how innovation can impact different financial sectors, from small banks to wholesale financial markets, and how those impacts will ultimately effect end users. For example, will "tokenized" products and platforms duplicate existing bank deposits and payment rails, potentially creating parallel systems? If so, will the products and platforms that duplicate these functions provide the same legal protections for customers and the overall financial system? The wide variety of technology and use cases can be a significant obstacle to getting to a place where regulators understand any one innovation. Innovation in the financial system can take many forms including new technology, new business models, and improvements to existing infrastructures. As one form of innovation, distributed ledger technology (DLT), including blockchain, has inspired new ways of thinking about the exchange of assets and data, in addition to the role of intermediaries and trusted third parties. DLT combines a number of different design elements—like distributed data storage, cryptography, and consensus mechanisms—that support the transfer process, information visibility, and transaction recordkeeping.2 DLT is an interesting example because it highlights the challenges presented to regulators in understanding innovation. There are many variations in the application of DLT—and ongoing research and development creating more variability over time—which ultimately may complicate understanding how the technology can be used, and how different functionality can be incorporated into DLT solutions for different use cases. In short, innovation can take many forms. It often involves new uses for existing technology that enhance core business lines, but it can also include the introduction of transformational new technology or capabilities. Customer demands for cheaper products or for new and innovative products often motivate banks to explore how technology and innovation can meet these demands and provide products and services for the future. While understanding technology is an important first step, it is not the only one. Regulators also need to understand the players who operate in the fintech space. Banks of all sizes have a long history of innovation, from the introduction of checks; to the advent of ATMs that allow easy access to cash and basic banking information; to online banking platforms and electronic payments that have simplified and streamlined the way many consumers and businesses manage and access their funds, receive credit, and conduct financial transactions. Innovation helps banks upgrade their existing business lines to better meet customer needs, for example, by introducing instant payments or providing credit in innovative ways. There are also many nonbank providers in this space, including core service providers that often hold the "keys" to innovation at small banks when they facilitate the add-on of new technology to core systems. And fintechs that may focus on even more transformational uses of technology within all aspects of banking. This presents another layer of complication when it comes to innovation in banking. Even with an understanding of technology and of the players involved, regulators still need additional feedback to understand the "why" of innovation. What is the purpose of the innovation? What problem is it designed to solve? Are there tradeoffs policymakers would need to consider if the new technology were introduced or integrated in the existing financial system? There are many examples across this spectrum of innovation. For example, take the use cases around DLT. Some banks are exploring the possibility of DLT as a way to help facilitate services like cross-border payments and financial market transactions. Other businesses may see DLT as a way to improve supply chain management by tying payments to specific activities across the supply chain. Some financial institutions see DLT as a potential solution for existing processes that require manual interventions and coordination across disparate systems. Businesses may look at a single technology—DLT—and see possible solutions to a wide range of problems. When the financial system promotes innovation, we better enable firms to serve their customers' unique needs while also advancing the capability of the financial system. Regulators and industry both have an important role to play in achieving this goal of understanding. Regulators cannot hope to craft effective public policy without understanding. And while industry's focus is rightly on developing innovative solutions, part of successful innovation in the banking space is promoting education and understanding for the regulators. Openness to Innovation: Getting to "Yes"As a second principle, regulatory openness is a critical ingredient to fostering innovation in the financial system. The first reaction of regulators to proposed innovation in the banking system is often not one of openness and acceptance, but rather suspicion and concern. The use of emerging technology and innovation may require a change in policy or supervisory approach. It also very often requires regulatory feedback—sometimes before innovation is introduced, in others after it has been rolled out and is reviewed during the supervisory process. As a financial policymaker and a regulator, I recognize that there are a number of questions we must answer before pursuing a change in policy, whether in the form of regulation, or in supervisory approach, to facilitate innovation in the financial system. Regulators need to ask whether we have considered the intended and unintended outcomes of a new innovation, and do the benefits of the new technology outweigh the risks? Would the introduction of a new technology or innovation in the banking system require updating our regulatory framework to incorporate clear oversight? Who should have responsibility for oversight, and what roles do we see for different regulators at both the state and federal level? Transformational technology requires clear, consistent, and transparent guardrails and expectations to govern the activities that are allowed into the regulated financial system. Where current regulation does not contemplate a new activity, should it be acceptable for financial agencies to regulate the activity through supervision and enforcement alone? Or should congressional action address the treatment of these activities in the financial system? These are difficult questions, to be sure, but ones we must confront if we are to allow innovation to flourish in the banking system and the broader financial system. Ensuring an orderly and observable method for regulators to understand and provide a path for potentially disruptive or transformational technology could ultimately enhance the long-term stability of the financial system. So, while the obligation topromote understandingmay fall more heavily on industry, the obligation tobe receptive to innovationfalls more heavily on regulators. We must fight the temptation to say "no" and resist new technology, and instead focus on solutions—how can we mitigate the risk of new technology? What benefits will technology bring to the financial system? How can we provide clear regulatory expectations? The appeal of resisting innovation—resisting change—is that it preserves the familiar and known. But the cost of resistance to change may be great, in that it promotes stagnation and inertia. Ultimately, this could lead to a banking system that may be safer and smaller, but also less effective at providing banking products and services and in supporting the U.S. economy. Innovation as a Priority in BankingUnderstanding and openness can go a long way to promoting innovation, but I think there are opportunities to do more. Can we shift from a reactive approach to innovation, to an active one that facilitates innovation? This leads to my final principle, which is that regulators can do more to promote innovation. Regulators can do more than simply tolerate innovation, they can promote it through transparency and open communication. Take, for example, the frictions associated with cross border payments, including the speed and cost and the ability to transfer money. At first blush, this seems like a prime opportunity for innovation to come in with a new approach. The challenge in cross-border payments historically has been achieving the goal of serving new types of customers and increasing the speed of payments, without losing or watering down important compliance safeguards that deter criminal activity. Some perceived payment frictions exist for specific policy reasons and do not stem from issues with existing technology. Therefore, new technology alone cannot solve the issue unless it also addresses the required safeguards. Regulators can serve a valuable role in identifying where a technology solution may have an important "gap," as in the case of cross-border payments, by identifying how a solution can meet the needs of both customers and regulators. Innovation and regulatory and legal requirements can coexist—providing both enhanced capability and regulatory compliance. Transparency can promote innovation. Policymakers should strive to define a clear and sensible regulatory framework designed to meet policy objectives that also enables the private sector to innovate within the established guardrails. A clear regulatory framework supports private sector innovators by providing clarity and consistency that encourages long term business investment in pursing innovation, while continuing to support today's products and services. A regulatory framework empowers supervisors to focus on safety and soundness and ensuring a safe and efficient payment system. In the past, I have described an approach to innovation that solves specific problems and enables banks and other providers to meet the needs of their customers in a safe and sound manner.3This approach recognizes the role of the private sector and focuses policymakers on payment and financial system infrastructure while balancing the public policy objectives with the benefits provided. In this construct, the same activities that present the same risks must be subject to the same regulatory expectations—regardless of what the product is called or where it is offered. The active promotion of innovation has proven to be successful in the past. One example from 2019 highlights the benefits of this approach, specifically as it relates to the use of alternative data to support small dollar consumer loans.4Timely guidance and regulatory clarity in the interagency statement clarified that, with a customer's consent, a bank may use alternative data, like checking account balance activity to help evaluate the potential borrower's creditworthiness who might not have otherwise qualified for a loan. This example did not require a change in technology, instead it used data in a responsible and innovative way through leveraging deposit account cashflow information to show credit worthiness, enabling banks to meet their customers' credit needs. I think there is more we could do on this front. For example, I think there are opportunities for regulators to provide clear, actionable, and timely feedback on innovation proposals. And the principles I have described are complementary—the more regulators understand innovation, the more comfortable they will be in accepting it and promoting its adoption in the financial system. My hope is that the Federal Reserve's ongoing research and engagement with industry will help us continue to understand and assess the potential benefits and risks presented by new innovation. Closing thoughtsAs I consider the ever-evolving financial landscape, I will continue think about how the regulatory framework can accommodate new technology and services, while applying the safeguards in place today that protect households and businesses, and guard against illicit activity, ensuring the safety and soundness and the stability of the financial system. My hope is that as we enhance our understanding, and we recognize the promise of new technology, we can achieve a banking system that welcomes innovation, and is stronger and more efficient as a result. Thank you for the invitation to join you today to discuss these issues. I look forward to our discussion. 1. Thank you to Priyanka Slattery and Alex Sproveri of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See, e.g., Mills, David, Kathy Wang, Brendan Malone, Anjana Ravi, Jeff Marquardt, Clinton Chen, Anton Badev, Timothy Brezinski, Linda Fahy, Kimberley Liao, Vanessa Kargenian, Max Ellithorpe, Wendy Ng, and Maria Baird (2016). "Distributed ledger technology in payments, clearing, and settlement," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-095. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 3. Michelle W. Bowman, "Responsible Innovation in Money and Payments (PDF)," (Speech at the Roundtable on Central Bank Digital Currency, hosted by the Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, October 17, 2023).Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting," CA letter 19-11, December 12.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Adam, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.1The Peterson Institute is renowned for its valuable contributions to research and its influence on economic policy. There really is no better place for a central banker to come and talk about the outlook for the U.S. economy and the implications for monetary policy. It truly is a pleasure to be here. Peterson was also the host for my first speech as a governor back in early 2021, which unfortunately, was virtual.2So, after an eventful three years, it's nice to be back and in person. After a run of great data in the latter half of 2023, it seemed that significant progress on inflation would continue and that rate cuts were not far off. However, the first three months of 2024 threw cold water on that outlook, as data on both inflation and economic activity came in much hotter than anticipated. Initially it seemed like the bad data might be simply a "bump" in the road, but as the data continued to point in the wrong direction, the narrative quickly turned towards concerns that the economy was not cooling as needed to keep inflation moving down toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent goal. Progress on inflation appeared to have stalled and there were fears that it might even be accelerating. Suddenly, the public debate became whether monetary policy was restrictive enough and if rate hikes should be back on the table. But more recent data on the economy indicate that restrictive monetary policy is helping to cool off aggregate demand and the inflation data for April suggests that progress toward 2 percent has likely resumed. Central bankers should never say never, but the data suggests that inflation isn't accelerating, and I believe that further increases in the policy rate are probably unnecessary. Now let me turn to the data we have seen since the last FOMC meeting. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at about a 4 percent annual pace in the second half of 2023, and that stepped down to 1.6 percent in the first quarter on this year. That looked like the kind of moderation that would support progress on inflation, but it was mostly due to two components that tend to be volatile and not reflect fundamental growth—trade in goods and services and additions to inventories. Private domestic final purchases—which is often a better signal of the underlying strength of demand in the economy—grew 3.1 percent in the first three months of this year, almost exactly the pace in the second half of 2023. I will be watching closely to see whether this measure of economic activity in the first quarter continues in the second. The Blue Chip consensus of private-sector forecasts projects real GDP growth of 2.1 percent this quarter, with only a slight moderation in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the first quarter. Others, like the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow model, have a higher forecast. Nevertheless, there are several reasons why I do expect some moderation in economic activity. One sign of moderation is that retail sales were flat in April and revised down in the previous two months. Retail sales are an important component of consumer spending, so this suggests that consumers may be tempering their purchases. We have also seen credit card and auto loan delinquency rates rise above their pre-pandemic levels, which indicates that some consumer segments are under stress to support their spending levels. That said, services spending data are continuing to look solid and should hold up overall spending in this quarter. Another sign of moderation in the economy comes from the Institute for Supply Management's (ISM) survey of purchasing managers, those who make spending and investment decisions for businesses. For the first time in four years, the indexes for surveys of both manufacturing and non-manufacturing businesses slipped below 50 in April, indicating that production in these businesses was contracting. This wasn't surprising for manufacturing businesses, since they have been reporting weakness in employment and inventories for some time. The surprise was that the survey of non-manufacturing businesses, representing the lion's share of U.S. output, fell below 50, indicating a deceleration in activity. This has not happened since December 2022. ISM results can move around from month to month, but if these numbers are sustained, it would be indicative of slowing economic activity beyond manufacturing. One month does not constitute a trend, but this data suggests that policy is doing its job to moderate aggregate demand, which will support renewed progress in lowering inflation. Now let me speak about the labor market. The labor market is still relatively strong and supporting a solid pace of job creation, but after progress in bringing demand and supply into better balance in 2023, this rebalancing seemed to stall at the beginning of this year. Then in the past month or two, the easing of demand, relative to supply seems to have resumed. The hiring rate, reported by the Labor Department, slowed relative to the previous three months. In March, the share of workers who voluntarily quit their jobs declined, with the quits rate falling below pre-pandemic levels. This is a sign that fewer workers are jumping to a new and usually higher-paying job. That means firms are in less need to fill vacancies and offer relatively high starting salaries, something that could support moderating wage increases. Job creation fell from 315,000 in March to 175,000 in April. A big reason for the decline was a sharp drop in the pace of job creation by state and local governments that is unlikely to be repeated, but private sector job creation also fell, another indication that demand for workers continues to slow. That was also the message I take from the unemployment rate in April, which ticked up to 3.9 percent. It was the 27th consecutive month that unemployment has been below 4 percent, the longest stretch in decades, but it stands noticeably higher than the 3.4 percent rate last April. Meanwhile, the ratio of job vacancies to people looking for work fell to 1.3, just a tenth of a point above the pre-pandemic level and a sign that the relative shortage of workers related to the pandemic is close to over. Wage growth is still a bit higher than I believe is needed to be consistent with our 2 percent target, but it's not that high and recent average hourly earnings data suggest that wage growth is moderating. And some measures of wage growth that tend to be forward-looking have also continued to slow on balance. Just like the data on economic activity, I see the labor market data supporting renewed progress in lowering inflation, so now let me turn to the outlook for inflation. Last week's report on consumer price index (CPI) inflation in April was a welcome relief after three months without progress toward 2 percent. That said, the progress was so modest that it did not change my view that I will need to see more evidence of moderating inflation before supporting any easing of monetary policy. If I were still a professor and had to assign a grade to this inflation report, it would be a C+—far from failing but not stellar either. Headline CPI inflation rose 0.31 percent month over month. That barely budged the 12-month total CPI inflation reading to 3.4 percent in April from 3.5 percent in March. More importantly for the inflation outlook, core CPI inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, came in at 0.29 percent, down from 0.36 percent in March and 12-month core CPI fell to 3.6 percent from 3.8 percent. Accounting for price data from the report last week on the producer price index, forecasts are predicting both monthly headline and core inflation based on personal consumption expenditures, the FOMC's preferred gauge, rose a bit less than CPI last month. Most forecasts seem to be in the range of 0.23 to 0.26 percent, which is less than March's monthly increase of 0.32 percent. Although both March and April may round to 0.3 percent, it is good to see monthly inflation falling, even if it requires looking out to the second decimal point. Looking across these estimates, they suggest three-month annualized core PCE inflation could decline around 1 percentage point to about 3.4 percent as the outsized January increase rolls off the 3-month average. Like the CPI inflation numbers, this is not where I want to see inflation. But, after having these three-month readings accelerate in January, February, and March, I'm happy to see a reversal of this recent pattern. It leaves me hopeful that progress toward 2 percent inflation is back on track. Before I say more about the implications for policy, this seems like a good moment to make a few points about a bedrock principle of monetary policy—data dependence. The appropriate setting of monetary policy requires understanding how the economy is performing and some idea of where we think it is going. The latter typically means making a forecast or projection, based on standard macroeconomic models, of key variables and what that implies for policy. But that forecast must be validated by the incoming data. The economy is dynamic, and sometimes new or revised data can significantly change one's understanding of economic conditions and the outlook, which has implications for monetary policy. One data point alone should not change one's view of the economy, and that is why changes in one's outlook and the appropriate path for policy tend to emerge gradually and over time. While you may have confidence in your forecast, incoming data may challenge that confidence. You neither want to overreact to incoming data nor do you want to ignore it. I am bringing this up because I hear from some quarters the claim that the FOMC has become "overly data dependent." This is a phrase that honestly doesn't make much sense to me but is apparently supposed to mean that we are over-reacting to data and allegedly sending confusing messages about the stance of monetary policy. I don't see how that argument applies to the views of the FOMC, if one looks at the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). Between the March SEP in 2023 and March 2024 SEP, the Committee median was relatively consistent in projecting around three rate cuts in 2024. This was in the face of some pretty dramatic shocks to the economy. There were the bank failures and wider stress in the financial system in the spring of 2023, when it was far from clear what the ultimate effects would be on the economy. There were significant fluctuations in inflation, which was hot in the first half of last year and then dramatically cooler in the second half. There was the revelation, over time and in different data, that a surge in immigration was augmenting labor supply and allowing a surge in job growth with very little upward pressure on wages and inflation. And then there were geopolitical developments, such as the threat that war in the Middle East might spread to become a wider conflict. Against this backdrop, the median FOMC participant only gradually reduced their expectation for the unemployment rate at the end of 2024 and essentially left inflation unchanged. Associated with this outlook, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2024 moved by at most 50 basis points between the four SEPs over 2024, and more or less held to the median of three 25 basis point rate cuts over the past year. This hardly seems like an "overly data dependent" Fed to me. For illustration purposes, contrast that with how the private sector reacted to developments in 2023. The implied federal funds rate based on overnight interest swap quotes for the end of 2024 see-sawed between 2 rate cuts and 10 cuts—for a few days, markets even predicted 11 cuts—and by the end of 2023 ended up implying 6 cuts. I make this comparison not to denigrate what markets were doing—they were simply revising their forecasts and accompanying risk outlook based on the data to maximize the value of their trading books. My point is that the approach of the FOMC is to set policy appropriately to achieve our dual mandate and typically that requires us to move gradually, extract the signal from noise from the incoming data and then adjust policy accordingly. Based on the evidence over the past year, I see nothing excessive about our data dependence when projecting the appropriate policy path. Let me now turn to the implications for monetary policy of my outlook for the U.S. economy. With the labor market as strong as it is, my focus remains bringing inflation down toward the FOMC's 2 percent goal. The latest CPI data was a reassuring signal that inflation is not accelerating and data on spending and the labor market suggest to me that monetary policy is at an appropriate setting to put downward pressure on inflation. While the April inflation data represents progress, the amount of progress was small, reflected in the fact that I needed to report the monthly numbers to two decimal places to show progress. The economy now seems to be evolving closer to what the Committee expected. Nevertheless, in the absence of a significant weakening in the labor market, I need to see several more months of good inflation data before I would be comfortable supporting an easing in the stance of monetary policy. What do I mean by good data? What grade do I need to give future inflation reports? I will keep that to myself for now but let's say that I look forward to the day when I don't have to go out two or three decimal places in the monthly inflation data to find the good news. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller (2021), "Treasury–Federal Reserve Cooperation and the Importance of Central Bank Independence," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast), March 29.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on April 8 through May 1, 2024. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on April 30–May 1, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board’s website. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeApril 30–May 1, 2024:HTML|PDF
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2024 Commencement, Georgia College and State University College of Business and Technology and College of Arts and Sciences, at separate ceremonies, Milledgeville, Georgia Governor Cook delivered identical remarks at separate ceremonies for the College of Business and Technology and College of Arts and Sciences on the same date. Greetings Georgia College and State University Class of 2024! Congratulations to all of you. For those earning your bachelor's degrees, you entered college during the pandemic and made it through a very challenging time to obtain a college education. For those of you earning graduate degrees, you took on a difficult course of study while in many cases also working and caring for families. The path may have been long and winding, but you did it. Congratulations and thanks also to your families, friends, professors, mentors, and everyone else who walked with you on the journey that brought you here today. It has been a journey, but I imagine that most of you are thinking a lot more right now about the path ahead. And I do want to talk to you about the places you'll go and the things you'll do. I think that one of the most exciting aspects of this moment is the infinite set of possibilities your future holds. If you have any doubts about that, let me tell you about the improbable, unimaginable journey that has led me here—back here—today. It is customary at commencements to hand the speaking duties over to an alumnus or alumna of the college or university who has gone forth and done well. I note with approval that this is exactly what GCSU has done this year, by inviting two distinguished alumnae to speak at ceremonies for the College of Health Sciences and the College of Education. So, I will stipulate that I am not a graduate of GCSU. However, my roots here run much deeper than that. I was born and raised here in Milledgeville, but in many ways, it was Georgia College, as it was known then, that was my home. My mother, Professor Mary Murray Cook, was the first tenured African American faculty member at this university. She was a member of the faculty of the department of nursing here for 17 years. I want to thank several of her former students and advisees, including Deborah Davis Arnold Boyd, Mary Gordy Hurt, and former professor in the department of nursing Ella Milner, as well as some of her former colleagues, Dr. John Sallstrom and Dr. Harriett Whipple, for joining us here today. Let me also acknowledge and thank my sisters, other family members, friends, former church members, and former Girl Scouts in attendance today. My feelings about GCSU begin with immense gratitude. It was rare in the early 1960s for colleges to hire, let alone to grant tenure to, an African American man or woman, particularly in a rural community in Georgia. My father, Rev. Payton B. Cook, worked as a chaplain and then in senior leadership at the state hospital. But due to my mother's participation in many aspects of the college, I grew up here, on this campus. My family lived through the events that brought Milledgeville out of a deeply segregated South and made Georgia College and State University into the university it is today. My sisters and I attended the Peabody School, a laboratory school created and run by GCSU's College of Education. In that contentious era, we helped desegregate Peabody. Some of the students did not welcome us, but the school did. While Milledgeville moved forward in fits and starts, Peabody was a nurturing and positive place for me, much like the university it served. One of my fondest memories at Peabody was when teachers allowed us to take classroom pets home for the weekend. On one occasion, my sisters and I cared for a guinea pig, an event that was remembered by us with delight, but rather differently by my parents. Outside my home and those of my extended family, the lab school was the first place to seriously entertain and cultivate our curiosity. I would also like to acknowledge my great teachers at Baldwin High School who were trained at Georgia College. One I especially remember fondly was my AP English teacher and writer extraordinaire, Sandra Worsham. She was constantly writing and sharing her writing and writing practice with us. She submitted her short stories to theNew Yorker, got rejected, and, with great tenacity, resubmitted her work elsewhere, which was an invaluable skill to learn as an aspiring professor who dreamed of being published. Thank you! Much of my childhood revolved around Georgia College. The scholars in my family were social and natural scientists, and my sisters and I entered science fairs that were supported by GCSU and sometimes judged by its faculty. We also learned a lot from students at Georgia College. We were especially sponges in the presence of the international students, so far from home, whom my mother advised and whom my parents took a special interest in and often invited to church at Flagg Chapel and to our house for Sunday dinner. These students brought the world to us. My sisters and I will also forever be grateful to another group of students, our GCSU babysitters, who were critical in promoting scholastic achievement while exposing us to popular culture, which we had little access to at home. They smuggled in music by Earth, Wind, and Fire, Teddy Pendergrass, and other artists, rescuing the Cook girls from being seen as complete nerds. Something else that brought the world to me was the GCSU library, and its amazing librarians, who could assist a curious girl who always had more questions. Around my house, many questions from the pesky kids were met with, "Ask your mom", or "Ask your dad." And, if my parents did not know the answer, they said "Ask the encyclopedia or the librarian (at Georgia College)!" The librarians and archivists took special pride in preserving the legacy of renowned author Flannery O'Connor, a resident of Milledgeville and 1945 graduate of Georgia College for Women, as it was known then. I remember walking by an exhibit displaying some part of the O'Connor archives each time I visited the library. The Georgia College community introduced us to the world in many other ways. Allied Arts, the local arts-presenting organization, partnered with the university to bring world renowned dance, theater, and music performances, as well as the visual arts, to the college community and the town. Betty Snyder, whom some faculty and staff might remember, was the indefatigable force and immense talent leading Allied Arts at the time. Her daughter, Genie Snyder Chamberlain, is with us today. The national arts program of the public service organization Delta Sigma Theta Sorority also partnered with my mother and the college to bring well- and little-known history makers to campus. In the seventh grade, I was afforded the transformative opportunity as a student journalist to interview three of these figures—poet Nikki Giovanni; Rosey Grier, the actor, football star, and entrepreneur; and Olympian and track star Wilma Rudolph. Georgia College not only brought the world to us, but it also brought us to the world, a world larger than ourselves. For my family, GCSU always represented the promise, so fundamental to the Civil Rights Movement, that education would help bring about the fairer and more just world that we hoped to make. The first students of African descent were integrating the college and, with their classmates, implementing the change they wanted to see in the world. My sisters and I distinctly remember the day the college voted to make history in the 1970s and selected Monica Manns as the first Black woman to become Miss Georgia College. In a fundamental way, on this campus, what mattered was intelligence, knowledge, and effort. For me personally, from an early age, GCSU and the world it opened to me was evidence that I could do anything in life and be anyone I dreamed of being, regardless of where I was raised and whatever my race or gender. GCSU represented the endless possibilities of what I could do with my life, but it also planted the seeds of what I have actually done. When I was in the sixth grade, my mother helped to start a Delta Sigma Theta chapter at GCSU. Are there some Deltas out there today? It was there I first heard about the woman who was Delta's first national president: Dr. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander. She was the first African American woman to graduate from the University of Pennsylvania law school, the first Black woman to practice law in that state, and an early civil rights activist. She went on to serve on President Truman's Committee on Civil Rights and played a prominent role in Philadelphia's civic life. But before all those achievements, Sadie Alexander's first interest was economics. She wanted to understand, among other things, what the major causes were of black unemployment, which became the topic of her dissertation. Dr. Alexander was the second African American woman, ever, to earn a Ph.D. and the first African American to earn one in economics. But, unlike my mother decades later, in the 1920s, Sadie Alexander was actively denied entry to her chosen profession, the one she made history in, on the basis of her race and sex. Lesser people would have been crushed by this impediment. But she stepped around this barrier, made lemonade out of lemons, and pursued her interest in economic opportunity through the law instead. So, in seventh grade, at the Baldwin County social science fair, I took up the subject of Sadie Alexander's dissertation. Collecting my own data and employing some of the data and discoveries of economics over the ensuing decades gathered at Georgia College's library, I researched the major causes of African American unemployment. I remember that the local newspaper, the Union-Recorder, marked this occasion with a photograph of 12-year old me. I sincerely hope that picture remains lost to history! I did not know it at the time, but this was the beginning of my interest in economics. I did not know it myself when I went away to college—ranging as far away as Atlanta—and I did not know it when I graduated and was thinking about the appropriate field of graduate study. I figured it out, as it happened, at another place I never imagined I might get to—the slopes of Mt. Kilimanjaro in Tanzania. I was hiking alongside a British economist who, by the end of that trek, had me convinced that economics possessed the tools to address some really big and important questions—questions, I realized, I had been excited and enthralled by since my seventh-grade research project largely done at Georgia College's library. This economist also advised me on the higher-level math courses I would need to take to prepare to do a Ph.D. in economics, and within months I moved back home and enrolled in the first of those math courses at Georgia College. I relentlessly pursued the economic questions we discussed on Kilimanjaro and related questions, in graduate school in California and then in Moscow, where I conducted dissertation research on banking in pre- and post-Soviet Russia. I became a researcher and professor, teaching first at Harvard University and then at Michigan State University. While much of my research relates to various aspects of economic growth and innovation, I have spent time in various roles addressing why few women and people of color enter and advance in the economics profession, which is related to my research on patent teams. Then, in 2022, I had the honor of being nominated by President Biden to serve on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, whose decisions affect the entire economy and the well-being of everyone in America. It is a very wide circle that I have traced to return here today. And now that I have told you a little about the role GCSU has played in my life, I think that you may begin to see why this homecoming for me is so meaningful and emotional. But I also hope that you can see what this story should mean to you. It means that whoever you are, wherever you come from, and whatever anyone has ever said about you or your capabilities, you can be anything and anyone you want to be. If you wonder what the future holds for someone like you, someone educated here in a small town in Georgia, who then makes their way in the world: I am here today to tell you that where you come from and have been is not necessarily where you are going, and that the possibilities are endless. Georgia College and State University has prepared you Bobcats well. You will only be limited by your motivation, preparation, and imagination. Oh, the places you'll go, and the things you'll do, GCSU Class of 2024! Your family, friends, former professors, your community, and I cannot wait to see it all and are cheering you on. Huge congratulations, again! Thank you.
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At Central Banking in the Post-Pandemic Financial System 28th Annual Financial Markets Conference, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Fernandina Beach, Florida Thank you for inviting me to speak today. As many of you know, I have two roles at the Federal Reserve—my role as a governor of the Board and member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), where I participate in developing and setting monetary policy, and my role as the Vice Chair for Supervision, where I oversee our supervision and regulation of the banking sector. In keeping with the interdisciplinary spirit of this conference, I'll touch upon these different roles, and how they both promote a healthy economy. To start, I will share a couple of observations about the current stance of monetary policy. Then, I'll discuss the conceptual framework that underpins the key components of prudential bank regulations.1As part of this discussion, I will also offer some observations about adjustments to our regulatory framework that we are exploring, including as a result of lessons learned from the bank stress in the spring of 2023. Current Stance of Monetary PolicyStarting with recent economic developments, I see the performance of our economy as strong. Labor demand is being met with rising supply from both improved labor force participation and immigration. We have solid growth and low unemployment. The unemployment rate has been below 4 percent for 27 months, the longest stretch of unemployment that low in more than 50 years. I am strongly committed to meeting the mandate that Congress has given us to achieve maximum employment and price stability. We are doing very well on the employment component of our mandate, and we have also made tremendous progress over the past two years on the inflation component. Inflation has fallen from its peak of 7.1 percent to 2.7 percent today. But we are not yet all the way to our target of 2 percent. As noted in the FOMC's statement following our meeting earlier this month, inflation readings in the first quarter of this year were disappointing. These results did not provide me with the increased confidence that I was hoping to find to support easing monetary policy by reducing the federal funds rate. This means that we will need to allow our restrictive policy some further time to continue to do its work. I think we are in a good position to hold steady and closely watch how conditions evolve. I remain vigilant to the risks to achieving both components of our mandate. I believe that the current approach is a prudent way to manage those risks. Evaluating risks is also fundamental to my other role as Vice Chair for Supervision. In the same way that the public depends on monetary policy to support a healthy economy, the public also depends on a strong and stable financial system, so I would like a spend the remainder of my time discussing the prudential regulatory framework the Fed uses to oversee banks and promote financial stability. Conceptual Framework Underpinning Our Regulatory StructureThe prudential regulatory framework for the banking system is crucial to supporting an economy that works for everyone. As I have spoken about many times before, banks play a critical role in the economy in taking deposits and providing credit to households and businesses, but distress in the banking system can impose widespread costs on society. The government and taxpayers support the banking system through deposit insurance and other forms of government support. The system relies on banks having the capacity to remain resilient and continue lending to households and businesses through times of stress. I will focus on three key components that underlie the resilience of the banking system: capital, liquidity, and resolution resources. Each component plays a distinct role in fostering a safe and stable banking system by promoting the resilience of banks and limiting the impact of their distress or failure on the broader economy. The three elements work together: capital absorbs the impact of unanticipated losses; liquidity enables a bank to meet funding withdrawals and provides time to right itself from a bout of stress; and resolution resources facilitate an orderly wind down of a failing bank, which promotes financial stability and limits damage to the economy. Capital is a core source of resilience, and common equity is the core of capital. Common equity provides the greatest degree of loss absorbency, and it is the first line of defense against the risk of bank runs. Sufficient capital makes a bank resilient both to cyclical economic downturns and unexpected shocks like we saw in March 2023. Capital can absorb losses no matter the source, so it is an effective defense against a wide range of risks that banks face. We use different models to set capital requirements because no one approach can fully capture the range of risks. These models include a leverage ratio, static risk-based capital rules, and a forward-looking stress test. Liquidity regulation complements capital regulation by ensuring that a bank has adequate resources to meet potential outflows. Liquidity can also support an orderly resolution. Requiring banks to hold high-quality liquid assets that are commensurate with the size and likelihood of sudden funding outflows is a form of self-insurance against unanticipated funding shocks. While no amount of liquidity can fully guarantee that a bank will survive a run, in combination with ample capital, liquidity resources can help stabilize an individual bank and limit the potential for stress to spread.2 A third element of the prudential regulatory structure that I will describe is resolution resources, in the form of long-term debt and resolution planning. Unlike the other elements of the regulatory structure that enable banks to manage through stressful times and continue operating, long-term debt requirements in the United States are intended to provide resources that can be drawn down in the resolution of a failed bank. In concert with requirements that large banks develop "living wills," or strategies for orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure, long-term debt provides loss-absorption resourcesaftera bank fails, which can be used to capitalize a bridge bank, provide time for an orderly bidding process, or for the preparation for sale of the failed bank's assets and liabilities. Moreover, long-term debt can reduce the likelihood of a run by increasing market confidence that there will be sufficient resources for an orderly wind down. These three elements of our regulatory regime are tiered so that larger firms that pose a greater risk to financial stability are subject to stronger requirements. This tiering runs through all of our regulation and supervision and reflects the diversity of banks that support our economy. For example, a small community bank is subject only to a simple leverage capital ratio and no liquidity or resolution requirements, consistent with its small systemic footprint. On the other hand, a global systemically important bank (G-SIB)—the largest and most complex bank—is subject to multiple measures of capital adequacy, long-term debt requirements, and liquidity rules. Periodic AdjustmentsPrudential regulation was substantially enhanced after the global financial crisis, providing the foundation for a strong, stable, and prosperous U.S. banking system. Capital regulation was thoroughly redesigned, and the Federal Reserve now conducts an annual stress test of large banks. Quantitative liquidity requirements were put in place and have greatly strengthened the liquidity positions of large banks. Capital, liquidity, long-term debt, and resolution planning have reduced the likelihood that banks experience distress and have limited the harm that the distress or failure of one of the largest, most systemically important banks would do to the U.S. economy. But the work to reform capital requirements after the global financial crisis is not done yet. The Basel endgame proposal represents the final step in addressing the regulatory weaknesses revealed by that crisis. It is targeted at ensuring that the risk weights that underpin the capital regime accurately measure a bank's risks. The Federal Reserve has received a large number of comments on the proposal, and we are focused on carefully working through those comments. We also undertook a special data collection from large banks to better estimate the impact of the rule on banks' capital requirements. I expect we will make broad and material changes to the proposal on the basis of the comments we received. Basel endgame will finish the work of responding to the global financial crisis, but the financial system is dynamic and continues to evolve. Regulators must ensure that the rules adequately keep pace with these developments. The Events Last SpringLast spring, the distress and failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), Signature Bank, and First Republic imparted important lessons about the functioning of all three parts of the regulatory framework. SVB was a highly vulnerable bank, and its vulnerabilities left the bank exposed to the specific combination of rising interest rates and slowing activity in the technology sector that materialized in 2022 and early 2023. Once the public appreciated the bank's risks, the bank was viewed as insolvent. SVB faced a run of uninsured depositors that was unprecedented in its speed and severity.3There were signs of distress at other banking organizations, particularly those with a heavy reliance on uninsured deposits. Signature Bank experienced a deposit run that resulted in the bank's failure that same weekend.4First Republic also had significant unrealized losses on loans and securities, and it failed a few months later.5Depositors at these banks withdrew funding at rates that greatly exceeded the assumptions made in our current, standardized liquidity requirements, although these firms weren't even subject to those requirements. In addition to facing historically fast deposit outflows, SVB and Signature Bank faced impediments to monetizing their assets, including even highly liquid assets. This was especially true for securities that had lost value and if sold would require the firm to recognize those losses. Securities can be monetized through repo markets, but firms may be limited by their counterparty relationships in these markets and the typical tendency of counterparties to reduce exposures when there are signs of stress. Both SVB and Signature Bank learned about these limitations the hard way.6Of course, there is one source of liquidity that solvent banks can rely on to provide funding against a broad range of assets: the Federal Reserve's discount window. Yet while the discount window can be an important source of liquidity, firms need to be prepared to access it. Ultimately, SVB and Signature Bank were resolved after the Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) recommended to the Treasury Department that it invoke the systemic risk exception, allowing the FDIC to guarantee these banks' deposits. The systemic risk exception is an extraordinary tool that is rarely used; its two prior uses since its creation in 1991 occurred during the global financial crisis.7The Federal Reserve also used its emergency authorities, together with a backstop from the Treasury Department, to establish the Bank Term Funding Program. These actions were able to limit the contagion in the banking sector. However, additional regional banks still saw deposit outflows and came under stress. We're working to address the lessons learned from these events in three areas. CapitalOn capital, I've already mentioned our Basel 3 endgame proposal and its role in completing the post global financial crisis regulatory reform agenda. With respect to the acute problems we saw last year, the proposal would also extend the requirement to reflect the impact of unrealized losses on capital to all large banks. Currently, only the largest banks are required to reflect those losses on their capital. This would better reflect interest rate risk in capital, a problem that played a major role in both SVB's and First Republic's failures. LiquidityTo address the lessons about liquidity learned last spring, we are exploring targeted adjustments to our current liquidity framework.8Over the last year, many firms have taken steps to improve their liquidity resilience, and the regulatory adjustments we are considering would ensure that all large banks maintain better liquidity risk management practices going forward.9They would also complement the capital requirements by improving banks' ability to respond to funding shocks. First, we are exploring a requirement that banks over a certain size maintain a minimum amount of readily available liquidity with a pool of reserves and pre-positioned collateral at the discount window, based on a fraction of their uninsured deposits. Uninsured deposits often represent cash needed to meet near-term needs—like paying bills or making payroll—and we have seen depositors act quickly to withdraw these funds if their availability is in doubt. It is vital that uninsured depositors have confidence that their funds will be readily available, if needed, and this confidence would be enhanced by a requirement that large banks have readily available liquidity to meet requests for these deposits. Incorporating the discount window into a readiness requirement would also re-emphasize that supervisors and examiners view use of the discount window as appropriate and unexceptional under both normal and stressed market conditions. Given the important role of the discount window, we're also actively working to improve its functionality. As part of these efforts, we are seeking feedback from banks, and this feedback will help us to further prioritize operational improvements. Second, we are considering a restriction on the extent of reliance on held to maturity (HTM) assets in large banks' liquidity buffers, such as those held under the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and the internal liquidity stress test (ILST) requirements, to address the known challenges with their monetization in stress conditions.10 Third, we are reviewing the treatment of a handful of types of deposits in the current liquidity framework. Observed deposit withdrawals from high-net-worth individuals and companies associated with venture capital or crypto-asset-related businesses suggest the need to re-calibrate deposit outflow assumptions in our rules for these types of depositors. As we saw during the stress of a year ago, these types of deposits can flee banks much more quickly than previously anticipated. Finally, we are revisiting the details of the application of our current liquidity framework for large banks. Long-Term Debt RequirementsThe bank failures and broader stress last spring show that we have more work to do so that large banks that fail can be resolved without negative spillovers. These events also underscore the important role loss-absorbing resources could play in managing the failure of a large bank, even one not designated as systemically important. Unlike capital, which is likely to be depleted by the time a bank fails, long-term debt is available upon failure to absorb losses, providing better protection for depositors, and limiting the potential cost of the resolution to the Deposit Insurance Fund. Long-term debt can further support the orderly resolution of a failed bank by enhancing the attractiveness of the bank or its businesses to buyers and maintaining the value of the bank's franchise. This, in turn, would likely limit the extent to which the FDIC would have to rely on the Deposit Insurance Fund to support the resolution. Long-term debt also complements our liquidity framework. An adequate amount of long-term debt can reduce the likelihood of depositors running, facilitate resolution options that would not be otherwise available, and reduce the possibility that emergency authorities would need to be deployed to stem contagion in the banking system. Long-term debt can also improve the stability of a bank's funding profile by reducing the bank's need to rely on less stable forms of funding. Last August, the bank regulatory agencies invited comment on a proposal to require large banks to issue and maintain a minimum amount of long-term debt. The comment period for the proposal closed earlier this year, and we are reviewing the comments received. Many commenters agreed that having long-term debt would improve the resolvability of large banks. Commenters also provided feedback on potential adjustments to the proposal, all of which we are carefully considering. ConclusionCapital, liquidity, and resolution resources are three legs of the stool of the post-financial crisis regulatory framework. The recent stress from last March has only underscored the importance of each leg of this stool, how each reinforces the others, and how weaknesses in one could render the others less effective. As a result, we are carefully considering changes to capital, liquidity, and resolution requirements to increase the resilience of large banks. We are attentive to the interactions across these proposals as well as the potential burden but ensuring that each of these three components is properly calibrated will help to ensure that banks remain strong and able to maintain their crucial role providing credit to U.S. households and business under a wide range of conditions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Numerous academic studies argue that capital and liquidity requirements work together to support banking system stability (see, for instance, Hugonnier and Morellec (2017), Kara and Ozsoy (2020), Kashyap et al. (2024), Van den Heuvel (2020), and Walther (2016)).Return to text 3. SVB lost $40 billion in deposits in a single day, with management expecting $100 billion more in outflows the next day. Together, these outflows represented about 85 percent of the bank's deposits. In contrast, both the failure of Wachovia and Washington Mutual in 2008 involved less severe outflows that evolved over more than a week (the failure of Wachovia in 2008 included about $10 billion in outflows over 8 days while the failure of Washington Mutual in 2008 included outflows of $19 billion over 16 days).Return to text 4. Signature Bank received in one day more than 1,600 withdrawal requests totaling approximately $18.6 billion, representing 20 percent of its deposits.Return to text 5. First Republic lost around 20 percent of its deposits in a single day.Return to text 6. SVB fell short in attempts to raise financing against securities due, in part, to limited established access to private markets. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, April 2023).Similarly, Signature Bank experienced deposit outflows well in excess of its established repo lines. See also Cotton & Company Assurance and Advisory, LLC,Material Loss Review of Signature Bank of New York (PDF)(Arlington: OIG FDIC, October 2023).Return to text 7. See Congressional Research Service,Bank Failures: the FDIC's Systemic Risk Exception (PDF)(Washington: CRS, April 2024). Before 2023 there were five planned uses of the systemic risk exception (SRE) for Wachovia, Citigroup, Bank of America, the FDIC's Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, and the Public Private Investment Program (PPIP). The SRE was ultimately not used for Wachovia, Bank of America, or the PPIP.Return to text 8. I have discussed the importance of prudent liquidity risk management in a number of previous speeches. See, for example, Michael S. Barr, "The Importance of Effective Liquidity Risk Management" (speech at the ECB Forum on Banking Supervision, Frankfurt, Germany, December 1, 2023). See also Michael S. Barr, "The Intersection of Monetary Policy, Market Functioning, and Liquidity Risk Management" (speech at the 40th Annual National Association for Business Economics (NABE) Economic Policy Conference, Washington, DC, February 14, 2024).Return to text 9. The steps banks have taken include updating their contingency funding plans, reducing their reliance on HTM assets for liquidity purposes, adjusting the composition of their high-quality liquid asset portfolios, and enhancing their ability to tap different sources of liquidity.Return to text 10. The LCR and ILST are two separate, but complementary, liquidity requirements. The LCR is a standardized liquidity measure across banks, meaning the outflow assumptions are the same for each bank. The ILST is a non-standardized liquidity measure across banks, meaning each bank determines its own outflow assumptions, subject to regulatory input.Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the 2024 Diploma Ceremony, Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia Thank you for your generous introduction, Dean Solomon, and thank you for the invitation to be here and share this special day with all of you. Let me begin by congratulating the Class of 2024. Let's give a huge round of applause to our graduates, who are all so deserving of being recognized. And let's clap our hands together and also congratulate the families and friends who are here, too, because—believe me, I know—it takes a village! So let's thank all those who supported you along the way and who made sure you had what you needed to make it here today. I want to acknowledge that this is a real milestone. You have all accomplished so much already as you now embark on a career in public policy and leadership. And you are now joining the many Batten graduates who have made great contributions in careers in the service of others. I suppose I am here, at least in part, because I represent the promise and the possibility of a career spent in large part in public-policy-related work. I work in that city that many of you possibly hope to work in—I am told that nearly half of master's degree students and more than one-fourth of bachelor's degree students graduating from the Batten School end up in Washington, D.C. In various roles, I have been fortunate enough to do some of the kind of policy work that many of you have set your sights on. I understand that a sizable share of Batten students indeed end up working in government but also in think tanks, in nonprofits, and in the private sector. Some of you have worked in Washington already or done internships there, and many of you will go forth from here and travel the well-worn path of Routes 29 and 66, avoiding rush hour if you can and finding two like-minded classmates so you can use the express lanes, too. Some of you probably came to the University of Virginia (UVA) and Batten knowing exactly what you wanted to do, with a clear view of the path to get there. Some of you probably settled on that goal and that path over the course of your studies. Certainly, higher education is a big investment, and everyone needs a plan for recouping that investment—in terms of income, of course, but also in terms of opening other opportunities that education can provide. As a professor of public policy at Georgetown, I always hoped to provide tools that would be useful for graduating students in their new jobs. And I do know, given the caliber of Batten, that your studies here have helped you to not only attain the tools and knowledge you will need moving forward but also to make the contacts and build the networks that will help you in your careers. Most importantly, I hope that your time at UVA has opened your eyes to opportunities that you hadn't even imagined when you first set foot on Grounds. Importantly, I do hope that you have learned over your time here about the many ways in which public policy work can be fulfilling for you personally and can also allow you to improve the lives of others, whether pursuing work on housing affordability, budget priorities, or access to health and education; building infrastructure capacity; or tackling financial stability. Ultimately, public policy and leadership are about helping people. It is with that latter point in mind that I am going to tell you about my own experience and the importance of allowing yourself to take risks and follow your own path as you pursue a career in public service. While this may contradict some of the advice you have received about managing your careers, I strongly believe that it will make you more successful and more fulfilled in the long run. I tell you this because I am probably an unlikely person to have been appointed to the Federal Reserve Board, as the first Latin policymaker in the Fed's history. I was raised in Colombia and came to the United States at age 15, speaking almost no English. I attended public schools. In high school, I carried around to every class one of those thick Merriam-Webster dictionaries because, of course, back then there was no Google Translate on smartphones, and also no smartphones! Another thing I carried with me, along with my dictionary, was the memory from my childhood of traveling around Colombia with my parents and witnessing great poverty and the suffering and social problems that come from poverty. At an early age, my brother and I would accompany my parents to shantytowns around Bogota to help with social projects, and we traveled the countryside to visit my maternal grandparents, who lived in one of the poorest states in the country. I would spend my summer with my grandparents since both my parents worked. My grandfather, who had to leave high school as a teenager to help his widowed mother raise his five siblings, would take us to his dairy farm at four o'clock in the morning to help milk the cows and put the milk in stainless steel tanks. Traveling the unpaved roads into town, we would then stop at various stores to sell the milk. But my grandpa's day was just getting started, because he was also the mayor of his town, and every morning, he would open his office and deal with the business of being mayor. While my grandpa never graduated from high school, he was an autodidact, and he worked hard to put all his siblings and his six children through college, and he saw serving as mayor as a way to help his neighbors. The memories of my grandfather overcoming many obstacles but also devoting his life to helping others were certainly an inspiration and remain a source of motivation for me even today. In fact, I remember going back to visit my grandparents over the years, summer after summer, and seeing the new roads that had been paved and the improved school and health clinic in the town and seeing how a life devoted to public service can improve lives. So when going to college, while not totally definite about what to study, I found that the memories from my childhood and the desire to find ways to address poverty guided my decision to gravitate toward economics and political science, and I figured the best path for me was to work in public policy. In particular, I discovered that economics was a science that would allow me to better combine my interest in math with my desire to help address poverty, so I moved in that direction, pursuing a PhD. I want to emphasize that my career was not linear or perfectly planned, but rather I have chosen to take detours. And, importantly, I have chosen to take risks along the way. Yet what was always a constant was my commitment to use my technical expertise to tackle poverty and social challenges. But I also could have never imagined that some of the detours I took would actually help me down the road in preparing me for my current role. As an undergrad, I decided to apply out of the blue for an internship with the junior senator from Maryland at the time, Senator Barbara Mikulski, only because I read a newspaper article about her work in the Senate as the daughter of Polish immigrants, which really resonated with me. Little did I know that I was going to be back at the Hart building a few decades later, making the rounds to meet with various senators as I prepared for my Senate confirmation for the Federal Reserve. In grad school, I spent time as a visitor both at the Brookings Institution and at the San Francisco Fed—where I worked on my PhD research while surrounded by policy-focused professionals. Stepping into these institutions pushed me out of my comfort zone and into the world of policy and discussions about what it took to prepare for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings while I was a grad student immersed in a highly technical PhD. program. Little did I know that I was going to be back at the Fed attending those FOMC meetings myself and at Brookings just a few months ago giving my first speech as a governor. I know as students, many of you have already done internships and searched for these opportunities around policymaking, and I want to tell you that this is exactly what will make you grow moving forward. Like me, you may someday be surprised to find yourself revisiting those important places where you once studied and learned, but now as a senior professional in a position to provide service in a very different way. For decades, I spent much of my career in academia pursuing answers to my big questions on poverty by doing research and teaching at universities. Throughout, I always focused on those same questions that drove me to study economics in the first place—and always with my sights on the role of policy and the implications for real people, like my grandpa and others I had seen in Colombia and in the United States, who lacked opportunities. And that's when my next big detour came. Just one year after being recruited by Georgetown, I was approached by the U.S. Department of Labor to be its chief economist. While I knew I could contribute my knowledge in the middle of the Great Recession about the drivers of unemployment and effective policies to create jobs, I had never spent time working in government. This certainly pushed me out of my comfort zone again, and I am very glad it did, because I learned a great deal about how policy actually gets made while using my expertise and knowledge to conduct evidence-based policymaking. Little did I know that the data on prices and employment produced by the Labor Department would be the same data that I analyze in my current role at the Fed, looking for evidence-based insights to make policy that benefits all Americans. My point with all this biography is to show how the crucial professional experiences in my life have come from keeping my options open, being open to new opportunities, and taking risks. It is reassuring, and very tempting, to set one's sights on one and only one goal and to stay strictly focused on the path to get there. Any map will show the most direct route from Charlottesville to Washington—just take a right turn at Gainesville, right? But there are other destinations, and other ways to get where you are going, that may make the journey more enriching and rewarding. Be open to those possibilities. Be ready to try new things. One of the things you may gain from this approach is discovering talents and abilities that you may not know you had. To invoke a principle of economics, trying new things and considering new possibilities may help you discover your comparative advantage. Discovering a comparative advantage in this way is really just about learning more about yourself, a more general goal for life that I would recommend to everyone. And you may be surprised at how often the winding road brings you back to old landmarks you may have previously visited, but now with a stronger set of tools for providing service. As I said earlier, this approach to your career planning might contradict some very good advice from your professors and advisers, and maybe from your own parents, on how best to use the great advantage of your education at the Batten School. By encouraging you to step off the path now and then to consider other possibilities, I don't mean you shouldn't work as hard as possible to achieve your goals. Absolutely you should put your heart and soul into what you do, hopefully because you will find a job to which you are deeply committed and you love. My own career so far has followed a winding road. It is certainly not what I expected when I was sitting where you are sitting today. But I'm glad I said yes, took some chances, and experienced different kinds of jobs in different types of organizations. Keep a lookout for opportunities and consider saying yes even if doing so might move you off your planned path for a time. You may discover strengths and abilities you didn't recognize before. You may develop interests and even passions that you never expected to develop. Changing the world might begin with a change of perspective that helps you better understand the realities around you and also yourself. Be open to all that. Congratulations, again, to the Class of 2024, and the best of luck wherever the road takes you. And if that is the Fed, please do make sure to pop in to say hi!
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the International Organization for Standardization Technical Committee 68 Financial Services 44th Plenary Meeting, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota Thank you, President Kashkari, for the introduction, and thank you to the conference participants for the opportunity to speak with you.1As you all know, the payment system relies on the kind of cooperation and collaboration that this body represents. So, let's begin by acknowledging that ongoing effort. From its founding, the Federal Reserve has played a central role in payments. We seek to foster a payment and settlement system that is safe and efficient. Such a system promotes a vibrant economy, since it allows for participation from a broad range of individuals and businesses without requiring them to invest heavily in bilateral arrangements. Technical standards are the common language used by payment system participants like businesses, financial institutions, payment system operators, and payment service providers. Technical standards can help contribute to payment system safety and efficiency, benefitting the full range of participants. Technical standards for payments are in no way new—we have had them in place for decades, and those standards make it more efficient to process a check, access cash at an ATM, and carry out other functions less visible to consumers but essential to the payment system. As payments technology advances at a rapid pace, technical standards must also evolve. And they must do so in a way that supports innovation while promoting safety, efficiency, and interoperability among a growing number of payments products and technologies. Today I will share some perspectives on technical standards, particularly in the context of evolving payments technology. Everything Old Is New AgainBut before getting to that, I would like to provide some historical context since the benefits of standardization within an evolving payment system predate this current wave of innovation. Let's start with some early examples from U.S. payments history. The free-banking era from 1837 to 1863 experienced significant fragmentation and corresponding frictions in the payment system as competing banknotes circulated across different geographical regions, requiring costly and inefficient trading of various forms of currency and featuring high levels of fraud and counterfeiting.2Later, during the national banking era from 1863 to 1913, checks were becoming a predominant form of payment at the same time that the population of the United States was moving westward, requiring a nationwide method to clear checks. The check clearing infrastructure at the time, however, was regional, creating a patchwork network reliant on correspondent banks to move and clear checks across regions, often at high cost and with long delays. Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913 and assigned the Fed a number of key roles including issuance of Federal Reserve Notes and, in short order, establishment of a national check-clearing network. These are examples that predate electronic payments where standardization improved the efficiency of payments. We can also call on examples where we have seen rapid changes in the technology of payments, and technical standards supported innovation by providing a common language for systems to communicate with each other. Immediately after 9/11, planes were grounded, and check payments, which were still largely paper-based, could not be processed.3This highlighted inefficiency in the clearing of paper checks. In response, Congress passed the Check 21 Act, which enabled banks to process check information electronically using digital images of an original check. The Check 21 Act created a framework for the substitute check to be provided under generally applicable industry standards and also served as a bridge until industry acceptance of fully electronic checks became ubiquitous.4Electronic check processing at such scale necessitated common check image exchange standards, which were developed and adopted through industry and Fed collaboration. And, as I mentioned earlier, the payment system once again is experiencing a technology-driven revolution.5Shifting consumer preferences and new technologies have led to new financial products and services. This includes the introduction of instant payments, advances in digital wallets and mobile payment apps, and the emergence and growth of digital assets. Innovators see an opportunity for enhancements in payments, whether through the introduction of new capabilities or finding ways to alleviate frictions such as speed, cost, and accessibility. While the potential benefits of these advances are significant, disjointed or incompatible innovations could increase fragmentation in the payment system or exacerbate frictions at different points of the payment chain. Will platforms that use newer technologies, for example, be able to talk with one another and traditional payment rails, or will they lead to siloed, parallel networks—so-called "walled gardens"? Supporting compatibility or interoperability is important because payment systems are similar to other networks in that greater participation in the network usually means greater value for its users. The network effects in turn can drive a more vibrant economy, since a well-functioning payment system can promote commerce across a broader range of consumers and businesses. While achieving goals like network scale and interoperability is a complex problem, technical standards are one part of the solution to support consistent communication among existing and emerging technologies. Perspectives on Technical StandardsA technical standard is simply a common specification or guideline. For example: when I drive across the country, I do not need to worry about whether pumps at different gas stations will fit my gas tank. That is because there is an agreed-upon standard. Or, in the example of payments, financial institutions adopt messaging standards to allow systems and networks to communicate with one another. If done well, the development and adoption of technical standards can help increase efficiency across payment chains and promote consistency in how disparate systems communicate. This requires standards that are technically sound, implemented consistently, and timed correctly to meet a market need. Technical standards—such as those developed within the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)—are voluntary, open, and consensus-based. The collective market can identify frictions where standards would be beneficial, and then individual firms can choose whether and when to adopt them based on perceived benefit. The process to develop the standards is open and transparent, and it requires consensus at every step. This process establishes standards that are seen as credible and legitimate. Considerations and Lessons LearnedIt is important to note that simply having a standard in place will not automatically translate to economic benefits. To achieve network effects, standards must be widely adopted. Developingconsensus-basedstandards implies that all relevant participants are at the table and advocating for their interests, which is not a given, but is critical if standards are to be widely adopted. Timing is also important. In the early stages of technological advances, standards should not be overly prescriptive to stifle innovation and should be flexible and adaptable as the market changes. Conversely, waiting too long to adopt a technical standard could lead to inefficiencies and high costs to comply after the fact. Standards also need to be implemented consistently, which requires industry coordination to align on common practices. Building on previous lessons learned, the ISO 20022 messaging standard was developed to be a common standard for multiple payment rails, with a structured data format, and aims to align messages across payment systems. Nonetheless, there has been variation in ISO 20022 implementation, and further industry coordination over time will be necessary to align on common practices. All of this—identifying the need and timing for standards, incorporating a breadth of industry perspectives, and aligning on implementation approaches—requires an immense amount of coordination. And much of this coordination must take place among competitors. So often a neutral convener is needed to achieve better outcomes. That is why we have standard development organizations like ISO to provide a forum where participants from the private sector, academia, and the public sector can contribute expertise and collectively shape standards in a way that meets business and public sector objectives, providing some comfort that the needs of all market participants and consumers will be considered. The Federal Reserve and Payments Technical StandardsThat brings me to the Federal Reserve's roles in this process—not role butroles. One such role is to serve as a convenor, with this week's conference being a typical example. Among standards development organizations, like the Accredited Standards Committee X9 domestically and ISO internationally, the Fed is known for impartial facilitation of efforts to work toward a common goal. In another role, the Federal Reserve leverages its expertise as a payment system operator to inform future standards and broader improvements in the payment system. For example, in 2015, the Fed issued a call to action in its paper, "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System," asking stakeholders to come together in pursuit of a better payment system for the future. The paper, and subsequent work, highlighted the role of standards to enhance payments security and efficiency at various points in the payment and ancillary processing flows, noting the importance of supporting industry efforts to develop and adopt standards, as well as common approaches to implementation.6 The Federal Reserve itself adopts standards in its role as a payment system operator. For example, the FedNow Service, which went live in July 2023, was built using the ISO 20022 messaging standard. Incorporating this standard enables a number of operational efficiencies, including improved information exchange between financial institutions, support for straight-through processing, and reduction in errors and the need for manual processing steps. We have also committed to adopting the ISO 20022 messaging standard for the Federal Reserve's wholesale payments service, the Fedwire Funds Service, by March 2025. We expect this adoption will improve the speed of wholesale cross-border payments by reducing operational costs and promoting consistent communication across global platforms. The richer data in ISO 20022 could also improve anti-money laundering and sanctions screening and support broader adoption of extended remittance information. In serving as a neutral convenor, providing payments expertise, and improving payments in our role as a payment system operator, the Fed extends its long history of engaging in the development of payments technical standards. ConclusionAs we navigate the latest wave of technological innovation in payments, the fundamental payment system dynamics and role of technical standards are not new. However, the pace of change is a lot faster now than in the 1910s, when paper checks were used. Collaboration among a broad range of private and public stakeholders can help to establish standards for integrating the new technologies into the payment system. Advocating for an open and transparent standards development process, where participants adopt standards that are technically sound and supportive of business and public objectives, is one way the Federal Reserve can help to foster payment system safety and efficiency, as well as support responsible innovation at its present rapid clip. 1. Thank you to Alex Sproveri, Hannah Kim, and Cy Watsky of the Federal Reserve Board and Ainsley Hargest of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for their assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. See Alan Greenspan, "Our banking history" (remarks at the Annual Meeting and Conference of the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Nashville, TN, May 2, 1998), and Daniel Sanches, "The Free-Banking Era: A Lesson for Today? (PDF),"Economic Insights(Third Quarter 2016): 9–14.Return to text 3. See Christopher J. Neely, "The Federal Reserve's Response to the September 11 Attacks,"Regional Economist, January 01, 2002.Return to text 4. See section 3 of the Check 21 Act, Pub. L. No. 108-100 (2003).Return to text 5. See Christopher J. Waller, "Reflections on Stablecoins and Payments Innovations" (speech delivered via webcast at the 2021 Financial Stability Conference, cohosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Cleveland, OH, November 17, 2021).Return to text 6. See Federal Reserve System, "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System (PDF)," last modified January 26, 2015, and Federal Reserve System, "Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System: Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey (PDF)," last modified September 6, 2017.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Reykjavik Economic Conference, Reykjavik, Iceland Thank you for the invitation to be here and speak to you today.1 I want to step away from shorter-term questions about the economic outlook and monetary policy to delve into a subject of longer-term significance—r*. While there are many concepts of r*, I interpret it to be the real policy interest rate that is neither stimulating nor restricting economic activity with inflation anchored at the central bank's inflation target. In the short term, policymakers must judge whether a given policy setting is restrictive or otherwise, and while this judgment is made with some idea of r*, a number of factors can influence the economy in the near term so that the current setting of policy usually differs from the value of r*. At the same time, policymakers continually update their view of the appropriate value of r*. Recently, for example, discussions have focused on whether or not r* has risen, which has important implications for the conduct of monetary policy. For the purposes of this discussion, I am going to be talking about the long-run, real value of r*, when inflation and employment have reached the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) goals. Because of that, an estimate of r* points toward where monetary policy is headed over the longer run. This is important for policymakers deciding the best way to get there and also for investors and other members of the public who make decisions in the near term based on their expectations of future economic conditions. Much has been written on this topic, and different methods have been developed to estimate r*. My goal today is not to debate which statistical estimate of r* is best but rather describe what I believe are the economic factors behind the secular behavior of r*. In particular, I want to address two questions. First, what drove the decline in r* over the past 40 years? Second, what are the factors that may cause it to rise? I am certain some of you will disagree with my answers to these two questions, but that is the nature of good intellectual debate and how we advance our understanding of the world around us. One vital fact about r* is that it is a theoretical concept without any reliable and straightforward way to determine its value. There are economic models that are used to estimate the value of r* and also surveys of market participants or policymakers such as the FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections. But r* is not a precise number, unlike the unemployment rate, which can be measured directly. For these reasons, all of the model and survey estimates come with large degrees of uncertainty.2That's why we always need to be humble in citing a numerical value for r*. One thing that is evident from these different estimates, and additionally clear based on the performance of the economy at different policy settings over the past couple of decades, is that the value of r* changes over time.3The change is slow moving, and I tend to think of it as related to the movement in factors that we can see affecting the economy over time. Though hard to precisely measure, having some understanding of the current level of r* is a matter of obvious importance for monetary policy, so I will focus today on factors that have contributed to the apparent decline in r* over the past several decades and look at how they may influence its value going forward. To get some indication of how r* has evolved over time, it is helpful to look at the real, or inflation-adjusted, yield of the 10-year Treasury security, the most widely held safe and liquid asset. Let me pause here and explain why this is a good real-world proxy for the theoretical value of r*. Think of r* as the level of the real federal funds rate once all the cyclical ups and downs of the economy have been factored out, including near-term policy tightening or loosening that sometimes is necessary to move employment and inflation back to the FOMC's goals. Someone buying or selling a 10-year Treasury security must determine the appropriate price (or yield) by thinking about not only the near-term policy rate, but also how the policy rate will evolve over the next 10 years. Thinking about the evolution of the policy rate, most forecasts expect near-term shocks to die out and the economy to move toward the FOMC's goals, so the policy rate—absent future shocks—will move toward and eventually reach r*. This means the 10-year Treasury yield embeds a value of r*. Since 10-year Treasury securities are widely traded, their price (and yield) is reflective of current market views of the value of r*.4 With that stipulated, let's look at how the real yield on the 10-year Treasury security has evolved. Infigure 1, I plot two measures. One is a series starting in the 1980s using the nominal 10-year Treasury yield and subtracting out the Michigan survey's view of expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years (the solid black line). The second measure is a market-based measure, Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS, which started trading in the late 1990s (the red dashed line). These series clearly show a downward trend in the real yield of the 10-year Treasury over most of the period, supporting the idea that r* declined over the past 30 to 40 years. Looking at the past few years, the two series show a recent increase. This is the source of recent questions about whether r* has risen, which I will address later. I want to pause here and show another measure of longer-term interest rates that some people use to gauge the value of r*—the real return on capital. In my view, this is not the appropriate interest rate to use for discussing r* because it includes some measure of riskiness of business activity and is not directly related to the stance of monetary policy. As you can see infigure 2, these accounting-based measures of the realized real return on capital, as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (the black line) or researchers (the blue dashed line), do not show the longer-term downward trend that we saw in the real 10-year Treasury yield. Also, these values have not necessarily moved up in the recent past either. I look at these measures of the return on capital and conclude that, unlike the 10-year Treasury, there is no secular decline in the real return to capital. One could argue about how this private return is measured, but recent work, accounting for a myriad of factors, finds only modest changes in this return.5 This divergence—the longer-term decline in the real 10-year government yield until recently and the relatively flat real return on capital—holds across countries. Many researchers have documented the decline in government yields around the world, so I will not here. Meanwhile,figure 3shows a chart from a paper by Monge-Naranjo and others where the median real return on capital (the white line) across countries has been roughly steady since 1980.6And, in fact, the blue region, which represents the dispersion of this return across countries, has narrowed over the years. To me, these data raise a very clear question: What are the factors or events that have driven a wedge between these two rates of return, causing the real 10-year yield to decline but the return on capital to be relatively constant? And what does this say about r*? Let me start by discussing what isnotresponsible for this difference in yields.7First, it cannot be caused by longer-run trends in productivity. Trend productivity affects the real return on capital first and foremost. So even if trend productivity growth was falling over time, both rates of return would have fallen. But, clearly, the real return to capital has not fallen over time. So falling productivity growth cannot be an explanation. Second, this difference in yields cannot be the result of declining population growth. Again, this would also lower the real return to capital since there are fewer workers to use productive capital, which means the existing capital stock is underutilized, thereby lowering its real return. So, what drove the decline of the real return on government debt? It is obvious that what makes U.S. government debt different from the real return on capital and other interest rates is its safety and global liquidity. I will briefly discuss several factors that have influenced the supply and demand for safe, liquid assets. I will try to make the case that the demand for safe, liquid assets outgrew the supply over the past 40 years, which drove a secular increase in the price of U.S. Treasury securities and, thus, a secular decline in their real yield. At the same time, the safety and liquidity of U.S. Treasury securities was actually increasing, which made them even more attractive to global investors. To be clear, I am not focusing on day-to-day movements in interest rates from idiosyncratic events that will ultimately unwind. Instead, I am thinking about factors that have long-term consequences for short-term market interest rates and, hence, r*. I will also consider how these factors may be influencing r*'s value today and in the future. Let me first explain why I believe the safety of U.S. Treasury securities increased over the past 40 years. By this I am not referring to default risk, which has been and will be zero. By "safer" I mean greater stability in the real return from holding U.S. Treasuries. I believe this occurred for two reasons. First, from 1980 to 2020 there was a significant decline in the level and volatility of U.S. inflation. Second, the Great Moderation during this period meant economic performance in the United States was less volatile, which meant less variability in the monetary policy rate. This lowered the interest rate risk from holding Treasuries. As a result, the opportunity to hold a default-free asset with less risk of inflation and economic volatility made U.S. Treasuries more attractive. Support for this proposition comes from looking at the term premium on 10-year Treasuries over the past 40 years, as is shown infigure 4. The term premium measures the compensation investors must receive to accept risk from holding Treasuries. As you can see, there is a clear secular decline in the term premium on 10-year Treasuries. I interpret this to mean that the inflation risk and real risk of holding Treasury securities made them safer to hold as time went on. Now let me turn to five factors that I believe played a role in causing the demand for safe, liquid assets to grow faster than the supply of these assets, pushing down Treasury yields and r*. Some of these factors are contributing to the downward trend in U.S. longer-term rates, while others affect global longer-term interest rates more broadly. The first factor is the liberalization and globalization of capital markets starting in the 1990's. This increased the global demand for safe liquid assets to investors around the world who previously did not have access to U.S. Treasuries. Financial and capital markets and trade around the world were liberalized, and information technology saw advances that aided the global movement of capital, which resulted in an explosion of cross-border finance. For example, the share of external financial claims and external financial liabilities as a share of annual global gross domestic product grew from around 100 percent in 1990 to over 400 percent today. That change reflects the fact that an increasingly large share of the world's wealth is invested abroad, much of it in U.S. debt, including Treasury securities. The rise in foreign official and private purchases of Treasury securities resulted in an increase in the price of U.S. Treasury securities, driving down yields. The second factor causing demand for Treasury securities to grow more than supply was the large buildup of official reserves that started after the reforms that followed the 1998 financial crisis in Asia. One consequence of removing capital controls and other financial market liberalization in other countries over the past 30 years has been to make foreign governments more vulnerable to sudden capital outflows and financial crises. Many countries have responded by building up their foreign exchange reserves to help weather such stress. Global foreign exchange reserves have increased from around $1 trillion in the early 1990s to $12 trillion today. Notwithstanding the drumbeat of warnings from some that the U.S. dollar is in danger of losing its primacy in global trade and finance, it remains by a very large margin the world's reserve currency. U.S. government debt, likewise, remains the primary form of low-risk asset, which is reflected in the huge stock of Treasury securities held as foreign exchange reserves around the world. The resulting demand for Treasury securities has contributed to pushing down yields and, thus, lowering r*. The third factor driving prices up and yields down for Treasuries and similarly affecting r* is sovereign wealth funds. In addition to foreign exchange reserve holdings, sovereign wealth funds from some economies, especially those rich in natural resources, have become an increasingly important way for governments to invest abroad and diversify their national wealth. They are an increasingly significant force in global financial markets. Although sovereign wealth funds are diverse in their holdings, U.S. government debt is typically a sizable share of these funds. Sovereign wealth funds have grown from $1 trillion in assets in 2000 to $11 trillion last year, and a lot of those assets are presumably in U.S. Treasuries. For example, Norway's sovereign wealth fund holdings of Treasuries grew from $5.6 billion to $132.4 billion over this period.8The growth in Treasury holdings by sovereign wealth funds has clearly contributed to the decline in Treasury yields. The fourth factor that is thought to have influenced Treasury yields and r* over the past couple of decades is the aging of the population in the United States and around the world. The argument here is that as people move past their prime working years, their demand increases for safe, liquid investments that ensure their principal is preserved for their needs in retirement. U.S. Treasuries fill this need. Aging has been driven by the fact that Americans are living longer, and another big factor has been the aging of the large baby-boom generation, born between 1946 and 1964. The share of the U.S. population aged 65 or older has increased from 12 percent in 1990 to 17 percent today, which is 1 in 6 people. There is evidence that the large number of baby boomers who are retired or planning to do so soon has boosted demand for Treasury securities.9Outside the United States, population aging is accelerating even faster. The fifth factor that increased the demand for Treasuries came from many new financial regulations implemented after the 2008 global financial crisis. Regulators in the United States and abroad increasingly wanted banks to hold safer and more liquid assets as part of their balance sheets. For example, the implementation of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio requirement for larger financial institutions in the United States considers Treasury securities preferable to other liquid assets such as mortgage agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. This rule has boosted demand for Treasuries. In the years leading up to the deadline for compliance with the rule, Treasury holdings by large banks increased notably.10Regulators have also focused on the safety and liquidity of U.S. money market mutual funds, and there has been a dramatic shift in this industry away from prime money funds, which hold private debt instruments, to government money funds that hold U.S. Treasury debt obligations. Thus, we saw a significant increase in regulatory-driven demand for safe, liquid U.S. Treasuries over the past 15 years. On top of this, the Federal Reserve shifted from a limited- to ample-reserves regime to implement monetary policy effectively at the onset of the Global Financial Crisis.11This regime shift resulted in more Treasury securities permanently held by the Federal Reserve. These policy choices have resulted in higher demand from the public and the Federal Reserve and put downward pressure on yields and r*. As I mentioned earlier, there has been a lot of debate during the past year as to whether or not r* has increased. If you believe the narrative I have just provided as to what drove down r* over the past 40 years, one must ask which of those factors have reversed. I do not believe any of these factors can explain the possible recent increase in r*, but some may conceivably be a contributing factor to an increase in r* in the future. Let's consider each factor. First, demographics are such that between 2015 and 2050 the proportion of the world's population over 60 will nearly double from 12 percent to 22 percent. This will continue to put downward, not upward, pressure on r*. Second, is it possible for liberalization of capital markets to reverse due to increased geopolitical frictions? Possibly, but not yet to any significant degree. Third, is it likely that central banks and sovereign wealth funds around the world will dramatically decrease their holdings of U.S. Treasuries? Not likely, although the growth in their demand may slow. As I have argued more extensively elsewhere, I do not expect the dollar to lose its status or influence anytime soon, and recent developments, if anything, point more to increased influence for the dollar than to any significant decline.12On top of this, I don't expect other countries to emerge as substantive issuers of safe and liquid assets to rival Treasuries as an investment, nor any change in the approach of the countries with sovereign wealth funds that would lead them to pull back from their foreign investments. Finally, is it possible that regulatory pressures forcing financial institutions to hold more safe and liquid government debt will recede and raise r*? The current regulations are likely here to stay, and banks are compliant with the rules. So the growth in regulatory demand for Treasury securities could slow (not increase) substantially. Of course, as financial innovation occurs regulations evolve, so we should watch how this factor as well as all the others can affect r* in the future. Let's now turn our attention to the supply of Treasury securities and ask if this can possibly explain why r* may be increasing now or in the future. The U.S. government issues Treasuries to finance deficit spending, which obviously impacts Treasury supply. Deficit spending and the federal debt have been increasing since the 1990s. I believe the factors increasing demand that I just reviewed have outstripped the increase in supply over the past few decades, leaving r* lower. But if the growth in the supply of U.S. Treasuries begins to outstrip demand, this will mean lower prices and higher yields, which will put upward pressure on r*. It is probably not news to many people that the U.S. is on an unsustainable fiscal path.13The latest outlook from the Congressional Budget Office paints a challenging picture of the future, with debt expected to grow at an unprecedentedly high rate for an economy at full employment and not involved in a major war.14 All of these financing pressures may contribute to a rise in r* in coming years, but only time will tell how large a factor the U.S. fiscal position will be in affecting r*. Looking ahead, as a policymaker, it is important to understand what is driving any movement in r* to justify using it to guide my policy deliberations. One cannot simply claim r* has risen based on gut feelings—there must be a reasonable economic explanation for why it has risen or fallen. My objective here today was to provide some arguments for what has moved r* over the past several decades and what could move it in the future. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Estimates from econometric models, whether using macroeconomic data, financial market data, or both, typically exhibit large uncertainty bands for any given study. And even these estimates are sensitive to model specification, sample period, data revisions, and more. Approaches that emphasize the underlying determinants of r* also have difficulty in identifying shifts in r* because the important movements in these factors typically occur only at very low frequencies. Information from surveys (at least partially) reflects the estimates from all of these approaches and so cannot speak definitively to movements in r*.Return to text 3. One can see the movement in estimates of r* from the models of Laubach-Williams and Holston-Laubach-Williams reported on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website athttps://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/rstar.Return to text 4. The 10-year real Treasury yield is the sum of current and expected real short-term Treasury yields and a term premium. Both near-term real short rates and term premiums that are affected by current economic conditions must be taken into consideration when teasing out a value of r* from the 10-year Treasury yield.Return to text 5. See, for example, Ricardo Reis (2023), "The Future Long-Run Level of Interest Rates (PDF)," presentation at the SUERF Conference, Vienna, Austria, December; and Emmanuel Farhi and Francois Gourio (2018), "Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends: Market Power, Intangibles, and Risk Premia (PDF),"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, 147–223.Return to text 6. See Alexander Monge-Naranjo, Juan M. Sánchez, and Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2019), "Natural Resources and Global Misallocation,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 11 (April), pp. 79–126.Return to text 7. For further review of how different factors are at play, see Ricardo J. Caballero, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2017), "Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor Shares,"American Economic Review,vol. 107 (May).Return to text 8. See Global SWF's website at https://globalswf.com.Return to text 9. For a model that shows how the evolution of the baby boomer generation has affected r* over the past few decades, see Etienne Gagnon, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016), "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).Return to text 10. See figure 1 in Jane Ihrig, Edward Kim, Cindy M. Vojtech, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2019), "How Have Banks Been Managing the Composition of High-Quality Liquid Assets? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review,vol. 101 (Third Quarter), pp. 177–201.Return to text 11. Policy actions taken at the onset of the Global Financial Crisis caused the Federal Reserve to implement policy with an abundant level of reserve balances in the banking system. It was not until 2019 that the FOMC formally announced its plan to implement policy with ample reserves over the longer run.Return to text 12. See Christopher J. Waller (2024), "The Dollar's International Role," speech delivered at "Climate, Currency, and Central Banking," a conference sponsored by the Global Interdependence Center and the University of the Bahamas, Nassau, Bahamas, February 15.Return to text 13. Discussion of growing U.S. deficits is not new. For a discussion of the growing deficit at that time, see, for example, Ben S. Bernanke (2005), "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia, March 10.Return to text 14. As reported in February, the Congressional Budget Office projects debt as a share of GDP to reach 116 percent by 2034, which is an amount greater than at any point in the nation's history; see Congressional Budget Office (2024),The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2024 to 2034(PDF)(Washington: CBO, February).Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Vice Chair for Supervision Barr submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on May 16, 2024. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Accompanying my testimony is the Federal Reserve's semiannualSupervision and Regulation Report. Today, I will discuss current conditions in the banking sector, supervisory activities, and some of our recent regulatory proposals. Banking ConditionsOverall, the banking system remains sound and resilient. Banks continue to report capital and liquidity ratios above minimum regulatory levels. Overall asset quality remains generally sound. Lending continues to grow but has slowed from the rapid pace of 2022, reflecting decreased demand and tighter lending standards. Capital ratios increased throughout 2023, leaving the system better positioned to weather potential losses, such as those from defaults on loans, or declines in the fair value of investment securities, which continued to accumulate at some banks this past year. Liquidity conditions overall are stable. Notably, liquid assets on bank balance sheets remained above their 10-year average throughout 2023, largely the result of a significant buildup in cash positions. Aggregate deposits were generally stable in the second half of 2023 and have been steadily increasing in the first three months of 2024, reaching a level not seen since before the stress of March of last year. Additionally, there has been a decrease in the share of uninsured deposits in the system. However, both supervisors and banks must remain vigilant and ready for expected and unexpected stresses, and presently there are several risks we are monitoring. For example, delinquency rates are rising among certain commercial real estate (CRE) loans, such as those backed by offices, and some consumer loan sectors. CRE delinquencies are now at a five-year high. Credit card and auto loan delinquencies have been rising. In response to rising delinquencies, banks have increased loan loss provisions. On this basis, combined with their capital positions, the banking sector as a whole should be prepared to absorb loan losses that may materialize and continue fulfilling its vital role providing credit to households and businesses. The Federal Reserve continues to monitor these conditions closely. The recovery from the acute stress experienced in March of last year is in no small part due to the success of the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP). This program was established shortly after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) to help assure the stability of the banking system and to support the economy. The BTFP helped to alleviate liquidity pressures, particularly for banks that had experienced significant declines in the value of securities. The BTFP ceased making new loans as scheduled in March without any related liquidity stress in the banking system. SupervisionIt has been a little over a year since the sudden failure of SVB and ensuing stress in the banking system—events which prompted questions about how banks manage risks and how we at the Federal Reserve and other agencies supervise that risk-taking. As noted in my testimonies last year, these events highlighted the need to improve the speed, force, and agility of supervision to align better with the risks, size, and complexity of supervised banks, as appropriate. As the banking system changes, supervision must adapt with it and appropriately account for banks of different sizes and levels of complexity. Risks can materialize quickly and come from various sources, and in March of last year, we saw that these risks can lead to failure more quickly than ever. Therefore, supervisors must take timely action as risks build up; deploy supervisory tools and escalation effectively; account for changes in market, economic, and financial conditions in their examination priorities and supervisory conclusions; and identify new and different patterns of risks. We have been making progress on these goals. First, we are working to ensure supervision intensifies at the right pace as a bank grows in size and complexity. This involves more frequently assessing the condition, strategy, and risk management of large and complex banking organizations and engaging more frequently with these firms through the supervisory process. Additionally, supervisors are encouraging growing regional banking organizations to enhance their risk capabilities commensurately with their risk profiles so that the transition to higher standards is more of a gradual slope rather than a cliff. Second, we are modifying supervisory processes so that once issues are identified, they are addressed more quickly by both banks and supervisors. For example, examiners have been conducting additional supervisory activities for firms with large unrealized losses on securities, high CRE exposures, or other material vulnerabilities. Where weaknesses in risk management have been identified, examiners are requiring firms to address these weaknesses promptly and encouraging them to bolster their capital and liquidity positions. Third, we are finding ways to better incorporate forward-looking analysis into supervision. A forward-looking view supports the goal of identifying and addressing material risks before they become serious issues. Forward-looking risk analysis also may help to challenge supervisory assessments and foster meaningful action where risks are underappreciated. RegulationThe lessons learned from SVB are not only applicable to our supervisory framework. Certain aspects of the failure showed that enhancements to our regulatory framework would benefit the safety and soundness of our banking system. Long-Term DebtOne of these enhancements was already in process several months before SVB's failure through an advance notice of proposed rulemaking—expanding the application of long-term debt requirements to additional large banks. Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (collectively, the agencies) followed up with a proposed rule calibrated to reflect the lower risk profiles of such banks as compared to the largest and most complex. The proposal would increase the options available within the resolution process and enhance financial stability. Losses to the Deposit Insurance Fund related to the bank failures last year could have been mitigated in part by the proposed requirements. We are going through comments we received on this proposal carefully. LiquidityAnother important area is liquidity risk management. A striking feature of last year's bank stress was that SVB, Signature Bank, and First Republic struggled to cope with unprecedented deposit outflows arising from a loss of confidence by their uninsured depositors. Other banks that experienced spillovers during this period struggled with insufficiently robust liquidity risk management. Banks found it difficult to monetize their held-to-maturity securities through repo transactions under severe stress and were not adequately prepared to utilize the Federal Reserve's discount window. Additionally, the stress revealed that some forms of deposits—such as those from venture capital firms, high-net-worth individuals, crypto firms, and others—may be more prone to faster runs than previously assumed. We are exploring targeted adjustments to our regulatory framework that would address each of these concerns: deposit outflows, held-to-maturity monetization, and discount window preparedness. Discount Window OperationsDiscount window preparedness is essential. The Federal Reserve's lending to banks through the discount window plays an important role in supporting the liquidity and stability of the banking system and the effective implementation of monetary policy. By providing ready access to funding, the discount window helps depository institutions manage their liquidity risks. Providing liquidity in this way is one of the original purposes of the Federal Reserve System. It is important that we continue to work to improve this tool. To that end, we are reaching out to a wide range of depository institutions of all sizes to learn from their experiences with the discount window. From this outreach, we will identify and prioritize changes to operations that can improve the efficacy of our liquidity provision. CapitalA safe and sound banking system is critical to a healthy economy, and capital is foundational to safety and soundness. Well-capitalized banks have more capacity to support the economy by continuing to lend to households and businesses through stressful conditions. A well-capitalized banking system reduces the probability that stressful conditions result in financial crises, which inflict devastating economic costs and suffering for families and businesses all across the country. Strong capital also reduces the risk that the government would need to intervene in unusual and exigent circumstances. This brings me to the agencies' proposal to enhance capital requirements. Since my last testimony, we have received numerous and meaningful comments on the proposal. We also received additional data from a special data collection. We are closely analyzing this information, and I expect we will have a set of broad, material changes to the proposal that allow us to have a broad consensus in moving the proposal forward. The changes will enable us to have a safer financial system that better serves American households and businesses. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2024 BOJ-IMES Conference, hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, Japan I would like to thank the Bank of Japan and Governor Ueda for organizing this year's conference and for the invitation to participate in this afternoon's panel.1The topic of "the effects of conventional and unconventional policy instruments" is an important one given central banks' expanded use of unconventional monetary policy tools to pursue their mandates over the past decade and a half. My remarks focus on the use of the central bank balance sheet as a monetary policy tool. I will first offer some observations regarding the benefits and costs of large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) by reflecting on the two episodes of the Federal Reserve's active use of the balance sheet in U.S. monetary policy following the 2008 financial crisis and during the COVID-19 pandemic. I will then discuss some considerations regarding future balance sheet policy as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) seeks to bring inflation back down to its 2 percent target following the post-pandemic inflation surge, and as the FOMC continues to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. Lessons Learned from Past Uses of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet as a Monetary Policy ToolPost-2008 financial crisis balance sheet policyA key challenge for the FOMC following the 2008 financial crisis was how to provide additional support to an economy that was experiencing high unemployment and subdued inflation after the FOMC lowered its primary and conventional monetary policy tool—the target range for the federal funds rate—to near zero. Given the importance of longer-term interest rates for broader asset prices and for investment and consumption decisions, the FOMC used both forward guidance and LSAPs to help lower longer-term rates, which had not yet moved to zero. The intent of forward guidance was to lower longer-term interest rates by shifting expectations of "low-for-long" short-term interest rates in line with a low-for-long federal funds rate. LSAPs, or quantitative easing (QE), were intended to reduce longer-term interest rates further by lowering the yields of specific longer-dated securities being purchased and by reducing more generally the term premia, the compensation that investors must earn to incentivize investment in a longer-term bond relative to a short-term bond. LSAPs could also reinforce the FOMC's forward guidance of low-for-long short-term interest rates. Such reinforcement of low-for-long forward guidance could be especially powerful if the FOMC communicated that it would not consider raising the target range for the federal funds rate until it stopped actively engaging in asset purchases for the purposes of QE. The Federal Reserve purchased both Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) as part of its QE programs from 2009 to 2014.Figure 1ishows the evolution of the Federal Reserve balance sheet assets and liabilities from before the 2008 financial crisis to the present. The Fed's Treasury and agency securities holdings increased from around half a trillion dollars to around $4.25 trillion by the end of the third round of QE, which ended in 2014. A range of studies indicate that the Fed's asset purchases were effective in raising the prices of and lowering the yields on the targeted class of securities.2Research suggests that these asset purchases also helped lower term and risk premia across other asset classes, including corporate securities.3The impact on the MBS pricing and credit flow was significant since securities prices in this asset class were especially impacted during the financial crisis. Financial institutions holding MBS on their balance sheets, including banks, were also significantly affected. Some studies have documented that the Fed's agency MBS purchases encouraged banks to continue to lend as the prices of their on-balance-sheet MBS holdings rose in response to QE.4Overall, the evidence indicates that the Fed's LSAPs following the financial crisis helped support the economic recovery. The progress on the FOMC's dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability was assisted by the further easing of financial conditions after the federal funds rate had reached its effective lower bound.5The post–financial crisis period experience showed that securities purchases in a specific asset class could be effective for those asset classes that had experienced stress, as was the case with MBS during that period. The Federal Reserve concluded its asset purchases in 2014, after initiating the tapering process in 2013. In 2017, the Fed began to reduce its securities holdings, which is often referred to as quantitative tightening (QT). In January 2019, the FOMC voted to operate monetary policy in an "ample reserves" environment.6This change in the policy implementation framework had the effect of keeping the size of the balance sheet much larger and providing more liquidity to the banking system in normal times than had been the case before the financial crisis. The FOMC ended QT in August 2019, and balance sheet growth resumed in October 2019 through the purchase of U.S. Treasury bills and securities following a brief period of stress in money markets in which the interest rates on repurchase agreements and other short-term funding instruments jumped, as noted by the line labeled "Repo Spike" in figure 1. This stress was interpreted as an indication that the level of reserves had fallen below ample levels.7 Overall, one could deem the post–financial crisis use of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet as a monetary policy tool as a success. Unemployment fell and inflation remained near 2 percent through the period over which LSAPs were conducted. The FOMC was able to end LSAPs and eventually was able to partially unwind them, though the overall terminal size of the Fed's securities holdings as a share of GDP following the end of QT was much greater than before the financial crisis. This much larger end state was a direct result of the FOMC's decision to implement monetary policy in an ample-reserves operating framework and had the effect of lowering the likelihood of future volatility in short-term funding markets.8 COVID-19 pandemic balance sheet policyGiven the effectiveness of the balance sheet as a monetary policy tool over the previous decade, the FOMC rapidly deployed LSAPs in March 2020 as part of its response to the pandemic.9These purchases followed the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic at that time, and the FOMC returned the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound. Following an initial higher level of Treasury and agency MBS purchases motivated both by restoring market functioning following a period of severe stress and by providing monetary policy accommodation, the FOMC began to purchase $80 billion of Treasury securities and $40 billion of agency MBS per month. In its December 2020 post-meeting statement, the FOMC communicated that it intended to continue this pace of asset purchases "until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee's maximum employment and price stability goals."10By the end of the pandemic period asset purchases, total securities held by the Federal Reserve stood at around $8.5 trillion. The pace of asset purchases during the pandemic period was much greater than in the previous QE episodes. Conditions in the economy and financial system were also different than those that prevailed following the 2008 financial crisis in significant ways. The stabilizing actions taken by the Federal Reserve to restore market functioning and to support financial stability in the first half of 2020, in addition to the much higher capital levels in the banking system relative to 2008, enabled the financial system to remain resilient. Credit continued to be available to households, businesses, and local governments following the pandemic's onset. The U.S. Congress and the Administration also provided extraordinary fiscal support in response to the pandemic—which included stimulus checks sent to households, expanded unemployment insurance, and the Paycheck Protection Program—that bolstered household and business balance sheets.11The housing market—recently recovered from the buildup of poorly underwritten mortgage debt in the lead-up to the 2008 financial crisis and a subsequent steep decline in house prices—remained in sound condition. And as households and families sought larger living spaces and amenities as they worked from home during the pandemic, house prices increased sharply. In hindsight, the sharp contrast between the economic and financial system conditions during the pandemic period and those following the 2008 financial crisis raise questions about the similarities in the response of the Federal Reserve and FOMC to these events. Was such a strong balance sheet policy response during the pandemic appropriate, and to what extent did such a strong balance sheet policy response contribute to the buildup of inflationary pressures and the post-pandemic inflation surge? Given the underlying strength in the housing market, should the FOMC have conducted such large purchases of agency MBS into late 2021? Given the strong fiscal response to support spending by households and businesses and large issuance of Treasury debt, should the FOMC have conducted such large purchases of Treasury securities into late 2021? I look forward to our conversation today and to future studies on these questions, such as those conducted regarding the effectiveness of balance sheet policies following the 2008 financial crisis. My own view is that the FOMC would likely have benefited from an earlier discussion and decision to begin tapering and subsequently end asset purchases in 2021 given the signs of emerging inflationary pressures.12Doing so would have allowed the FOMC the option to have begun to tighten monetary policy earlier by raising the target range for the federal funds rate. While a robust and rapid response by the FOMC was appropriate in 2020, I think it is worth asking whether such a robust response for so long was appropriate. The economic and financial system conditions were very different during the pandemic and included a strongly accommodative fiscal backdrop. Could the FOMC have reduced its pace of asset purchases earlier once it was clear that market turmoil had subsided, just as the 13(3) emergency lending facilities established in 2020 were allowed to expire and exit plans developed for those programs? A thorough discussion of these questions will be a useful reference for the FOMC and other central banks as they consider future use of QE as a monetary policy tool. This perspective would be helpful for historical reference when formulating appropriate balance sheet policy as a monetary policy response to future episodes when the conventional interest rate tool is near zero. Another important difference between the FOMC's balance sheet policy following the pandemic and its balance sheet policy following the 2008 financial crisis was the speed and timing of the subsequent reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings during the period of QT.13This difference reflects the larger amount of securities purchases compared to the earlier periods of QE as well as the quite different economic conditions facing the FOMC at the start of QT post-pandemic. These conditions included too-high inflation and a desire by the FOMC to tighten monetary policy through both the federal funds rate and the balance sheet tools. So far, the rapid and sustained pace of the Federal Reserve's securities runoff has proceeded relatively smoothly. A useful question for further inquiry is to what extent during the post-pandemic period has QT served to further tighten financial conditions. With the understanding that QT is a tool employed beyond conventional monetary policy restriction, how does one measure the incremental increase above the FOMC's concurrent increases in the target range for the federal funds rate and related forward guidance regarding its policy rate? Evidence to date suggests that QT exerts an independent effect on tightening financial conditions, though in some cases it may be asymmetric to the effects of QE.14Quantifying the effects of QT as well as QE will be helpful to policymakers in their future deliberations regarding use of the balance sheet in setting monetary policy. Future Considerations regarding the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet PolicyLooking ahead, the FOMC continues to reduce the size of its balance sheet as it seeks to maintain a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy to bring inflation back down to its 2 percent goal. Recently, the FOMC voted to slow the pace of securities runoff by around half beginning in June.15In its Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet released in May 2022, the FOMC noted that it would eventually slow and then stop securities runoff when reserve balances are somewhat above the levels it judges to be consistent with ample reserves to ensure a smooth transition to ample-reserves levels.16Aggregate reserve levels currently stand at around the levels at the start of balance sheet runoff in June 2022, and there are still sizable balances in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility. In light of these conditions, I would have supported either waiting to slow the pace of balance sheet runoff to a later point in time or implementing a more tapered slowing in the pace of runoff.17 While it is important to slow the pace of balance sheet runoff as reserves approach ample levels, in my view we are not yet at that point, especially with still sizable take-up at the ON RRP.18In my view, it is important to continue to reduce the size of the balance sheet to reach ample reserves as soon as possible and while the economy is still strong. Doing so will allow the Federal Reserve to more effectively and credibly use its balance sheet to respond to future economic and financial shocks. As balance sheet runoff proceeds, however, it will eventually be appropriate to stop runoff as reserves near an ample level. The FOMC will be monitoring money market conditions and related interest rates as it assesses the point at which reserve levels reach ample.19It will be important to communicate that any future changes to balance sheet runoff do not reflect a change in the FOMC's monetary policy stance. Not effectively communicating this point might cause the public to interpret the endpoint of QT as a signal that the FOMC would decrease the target range for the federal funds rate, thereby causing financial conditions to inappropriately ease. Another important issue regarding future balance sheet policy is what the composition of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings should be in the longer run. As noted in the FOMC's January 2022 Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet, the FOMC intends to hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run to minimize the effects of the Federal Reserve's holdings on the allocation of credit across the economy.20I strongly support this principle. Consistent with this statement, the FOMC will reinvest any principal payments from agency MBS holdings above the current runoff cap into Treasury securities. And once balance sheet runoff concludes, my expectation is that proceeds from agency MBS holdings would continue to be reinvested in Treasury securities in order to facilitate a transition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet holdings to consist of primarily Treasury securities. The longer-run maturity structure of the Federal Reserve's Treasury securities holdings is also an important consideration. A benefit of a balance sheet Treasury security maturity structure that mirrors the broader Treasury market is that the Fed's holdings would be "neutral" in the sense that they would not disproportionately affect the pricing of any given maturity of Treasury security or provide incentives for the issuance of any given type of Treasury security. However, a balance sheet tilted slightly toward shorter-dated Treasury securities would allow some flexibility in approach. For example, the FOMC could reduce its holdings of shorter-dated Treasury securities in favor of longer-dated Treasury securities in a future scenario in which the FOMC wanted to provide monetary policy accommodation via the balance sheet without expanding the size of its securities holdings. This approach would be similar to the FOMC's maturity extension program in 2011 and 2012, sometimes referred to as "operation twist."21It will be important to consider such potential costs and benefits to the Federal Reserve's Treasury securities maturity structure and the best ways to achieve the desired maturity structure over time. It is also important for the FOMC to clearly distinguish when the goal of future asset purchases is restoring market functioning or supporting financial stability. In my view, when the Federal Reserve purchases securities for such purposes, it should communicate that those purchases will be temporary and subsequently unwound when financial market conditions have normalized.22 In conclusion, the FOMC's past experiences with using the Federal Reserve's balance sheet as a monetary policy tool have demonstrated that the central bank balance sheet can be an effective way to ease financial conditions and support the economy in periods in which the conventional monetary policy interest rate tool has reached the zero lower bound. Importantly, the U.S. experience shows that the effects of QE and QT can have varying effects depending on the economic and financial system environment, an important consideration for future episodes. Just as when using the conventional monetary policy interest rate, monetary policymakers must use the balance sheet judiciously when setting monetary policy. Policymakers must also consider the risks of "doing too little" in balance with the risks of "doing too much" as they pursue their monetary policy mandates. Thank you, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I would like to thank Rebecca Zarutskie for assistance in preparing these remarks and Neeco Beltran for assistance in preparing the figure.Return to text 2. See, for example, Mark Carlson, Stefania D'Amico, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Bernd Schlusche, and Paul Wood (2020), "Issues in the Use of the Balance Sheet Tool," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); Stefania D'Amico and Thomas B. King (2013), "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 108 (May), pp. 425–48; and Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2013), "The Ins and Outs of LSAPs," paper presented at "Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy (PDF)," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22.Return to text 3. See, for example, Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek (2013), "The Impact of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs on Corporate Credit Risk,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 45 (s2), pp. 29–57; and Simon Gilchrist, David Lopez-Salido, and Egon Zakrajsek (2015), "Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound,"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,vol. 7 (January), pp. 77–109.Return to text 4. See, for example, Alexander Rodnyansky and Olivier M. Darmouni (2017), "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Bank Lending Behavior,"Review of Financial Studies,vol. (November), pp. 3858–87; Indraneel Chakraborty, Itay Goldstein, and Andrew MacKinlay (2020), "Monetary Stimulus and Bank Lending,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 136 (April), pp. 189–218; Robert Kurtzman, Stephan Luck, and Tom Zimmermann (2022), "Did QE Lead Banks to Relax their Lending Standards? Evidence from the Federal Reserve's LSAPs,"Journal of Banking and Finance,vol. 138 (May).Return to text 5. See for example Eric Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February); Kyungmin Kim, Thomas Laubach, and Min Wei (2020), "Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchases: New Evidence," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-047 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June, revised August 2023); and Stephan Luck and Tom Zimmermann (2020), "Employment Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: Evidence from QE,"Journal of Financial Economics,vol. 135 (March), pp. 678–703.Return to text 6. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm.Return to text 7. See the October 2019 FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 8. At the end of balance sheet runoff, the Fed's securities holdings totaled around $3.6 trillion. The FOMC had considered other types of operating regimes, including those that would result in a lower level of securities holdings in the longer run. See, for example, the discussion in the November 2018 FOMC minutes, which can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 9. The Federal Reserve also implemented 13 emergency lending and liquidity facilities under its emergency lending authorities and undertook supervisory and regulatory actions to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and local governments; see "Funding, Credit, Liquidity, and Loan Facilities" and "Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19" on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/funding-credit-liquidity-and-loan-facilities.htmandhttps://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisory-regulatory-action-response-covid-19.htm, respectively.Return to text 10. See the December 2020 FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm(quote text in paragraph 4).Return to text 11. The Paycheck Protection Program offered low-interest loans that would be forgiven to small and medium-sized businesses that met certain criteria; see "Paycheck Protection Program" on the U.S. Small Business Administration's website athttps://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans/covid-19-relief-options/paycheck-protection-program.Return to text 12. The FOMC discussed alternative approaches to slowing asset purchases at the September 2021 meeting; see the September 2021 FOMC minutes, which can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 13. The pace of balance sheet runoff beginning in 2022 has been roughly double the pace of the balance sheet runoff that occurred from 2017 to 2019.Return to text 14. Du, Forbes, and Luzzetti (2024) argue that the effects of QT are asymmetric to QE. This result may be due, in part, to investor expectations for QT before the authors look at announcement effects. See Wenxin Du, Kristin Forbes, and Matthew N. Luzzetti (2024), "Quantitative Tightening Around the Globe: What Have We Learned?" NBER Working Paper Series 32321 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April); and Lorie Logan (2024), "Discussion of 'Quantitative Tightening Around the Globe: What Have We Learned?' by Wenxin Du, Kristin Forbes and Matthew Luzzetti," speech delivered at the 2024 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, March 1.Return to text 15. See the May 2024 FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 16. See the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm.Return to text 17. Aggregate reserves stood at around $3.3 trillion just before start of balance sheet runoff in June 2022; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022), Statistical Release H.4.1, "Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks" (June 2).Return to text 18. Because the ON RRP and reserves are both Federal Reserve balance sheet liabilities, a one-for-one decrease in the ON RRP with securities reductions would leave the level of reserves unchanged. To date, securities runoff has largely been matched by a similarly sized reduction in the ON RRP rather than a reduction in reserves, reflecting the ON RRP's role as an excess liquidity absorbing tool during periods of large asset purchases by the central bank.Return to text 19. See Roberto Perli (2024), "Balance Sheet Reduction: Progress to Date and a Look Ahead," speech delivered at 2024 Annual Primary Dealer Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, May 8.Return to text 20. See the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm.Return to text 21. For more details, see "Maturity Extension Program and Reinvestment Policy" on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/maturityextensionprogram.htm.Return to text 22. See Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "Panel on 'Design Issues for Central Bank Facilities in the Future,' " speech delivered at the Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets Workshop on Market Dysfunction, Chicago, March 3.Return to text i. Note: On May 29, 2024, figure 1 was updated to correct “Credit and liquidity lacilities” to “Credit and liquidity facilities” in the legend and to correct “QE is quantitative tightening” to “QT is quantitative tightening” in the note.Return to text Accessible Version
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At the Mortgage Bankers Association’s Secondary and Capital Markets Conference and Expo 2024 New York, New York Thank you, Mark, for the kind introduction, and good morning to all of you.1I am happy to be here. Today, I will do three things. First, I'll share with you my current outlook for the US economy. Second, I'll discuss my thinking on the current stance of monetary policy. Third, I'll review the dynamics of housing prices which can feed into the persistence of inflation. My focus on housing price dynamic stems from the role housing plays in the American economy. For most families, a home is their largest-ever purchase and their most valuable asset. Capital markets professionals in real estate finance, like you, are crucial to the smooth operation of the housing sector. Families making housing decisions rely on a healthy and productive housing finance sector. The housing sector is also one of the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy. As such, it's an important channel of monetary policy transmission. Understanding the various channels of monetary transmission is crucial to fulfillment of the dual mandate given to the Federal Reserve by the Congress: maximum employment and stable prices. This mandate guides my thinking about monetary policymaking. With that, I'll turn to my outlook for the US economy. Aggregate Economic ActivityThe U.S. economy continues to grow at a solid pace. Adjusted for inflation, GDP was reported to have increased at a 1.6 percent annual rate in the first quarter of 2024. That was a moderation from a 3.4 percent expansion in the fourth quarter of last year. However, private domestic final purchases—which excludes inventory investment, government spending, and net exports and usually sends a clearer signal on underlying demand—grew 3.1 percent in the first quarter. That was about as strong as the second half of 2023. Indeed, consumer spending has been robust over the past several quarters. Nevertheless, I expect spending growth to slow later this year as restrictive monetary policy weighs on demand, particularly on interest-sensitive spending. Another reason for the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year is improving supply conditions as pandemic bottlenecks have unwound. I will be monitoring incoming data to understand better how much more help we will get from the supply side to bring inflation down further. The Labor MarketThe labor market remains solid. Monthly payroll gains slowed in April, with employers adding 175,000 jobs. Still, employers added an average of 242,000 jobs in the three months ended in April, and the unemployment rate remained below 4 percent last month. The supply of workers and the demand for labor continue to come into better balance. The labor force participation rate of individuals aged 25 to 54 is now higher than before the pandemic began, as shown infigure 1. Employers' need for workers, as measured by job openings, declined 12 percent from a year earlier, as shown infigure 2. This rebalancing of the labor market has resulted in nominal wage growth easing even as unemployment remains historically low. InflationOf course, I have been keeping a close eye on inflation. The good news is that inflation has eased dramatically from the peak reached almost two years ago, as shown infigure 3. However, inflation remains above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective. Core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices, which exclude volatile food and energy costs, rose at a faster pace over the first three months of the year than they did in the latter part of 2023. The April consumer price index and producer price index data point to a more modest increase last month. Even so, Federal Reserve staff estimate that core PCE prices rose at an annual rate of 4.1 percent over the first four months of the year. That is well above the 12-month change, which we estimate at 2.75 percent. It is too early to tell whether the recent slowdown in the disinflationary process will be long lasting. The better reading for April is encouraging. Fortunately, data on expectations suggest that the FOMC's inflation-fighting credibility remains intact. While there has been a recent uptick in Americans' inflation expectations over the next 12 months, long-term inflation expectations, over the next 10 years, remain close to pre-pandemic levels. That shows the American people believe that we will make good on our commitment to bring inflation fully back to our objective. I am acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those on fixed incomes and those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials, including housing, transportation, and food. That is why my colleagues at the Fed and I are so committed to returning inflation to our target. Monetary PolicySo, what does the current state of the economy mean for the policy rate we set at the Fed? At the most recent meeting, three weeks ago, my colleagues and I on the FOMC decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent. I believe that our policy rate is in restrictive territory as we continue to see the labor market come into better balance, and inflation decline although nowhere near as quickly as I would have liked. The FOMC noted that it does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. In making judgements about the appropriate stance of policy rate over time, I will be carefully assessing the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. At its last meeting, the FOMC also decided to continue the process of reducing our balance sheet, but at a slower pace. The cap on Treasury redemptions will be lowered from the current $60 billion per month to $25 billion per month as of June 1. Consistent with the Committee's intention to hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run, we're leaving the cap on agency securities redemptions unchanged at $35 billion per month. We will reinvest any proceeds in excess of this cap in Treasury securities, as detailed in the May 1, 2024 operating policy statement published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.2 The Housing MarketThe Fed sets policy to promote its dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability, and employment and inflation depend on conditions in the entire economy.Still, given our gathering today, I thought it would be appropriate to dive a bit deeper into the housing and home finance markets. As I said earlier, the housing sector is one of the most interest rate–sensitive parts of the economy. We have seen that sensitivity in mortgage rates and mortgage originations. As shown infigure 4, 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rates were close to 3 percent when the federal funds rate was near the zero lower bound in 2020 and 2021. Rates surged in 2022 as the federal funds rate increased. Consistent with the increase in mortgage rates, mortgage origination volume has fallen significantly. The current restrictive stance of monetary policy has weighed on the housing market. That is helping to bring supply and demand into better balance and put downward pressure on inflation.One aspect of inflation that has gotten a fair amount of attention is housing and rental costs. This is because housing costs make up such a large share of household budgets. To calculate housing services inflation, government statistics don't use home prices because a home is partly an investment. Instead, housing services inflation is computed using monthly rents that capture what tenants pay to rent a house or apartment and what homeowners would, in theory, pay to rent their own home. The way this calculation is derived means changes in market rents—or what a new tenant pays to rent—take a long time to pass through to PCE housing services prices, as shown infigure 5. In this figure, notice that increases in market rents, the blue and red lines, peaked in 2022, and PCE housing services inflation, the black line, lagged market rents and peaked in 2023. Lags in Housing Services InflationThe primary reason for this lag is that market rents adjust more quickly to economic conditions than what landlords charge their existing tenants. This lag suggests that the large increase in market rents during the pandemic is still being passed through to existing rents and may keep housing services inflation elevated for a while longer. This observation is important because it is an example of one of the underlying sources of lags with which monetary policy affects inflation. Another factor affecting pass-through of restrictive monetary policy is that fixed-rate mortgages are common in the U.S. It is often argued that this loan structure dampens the effect of monetary policy.Figure 6shows that the 30-year fixed mortgage rate is about 7 percent, while the average outstanding mortgage rate is about 4 percent. This lower outstanding mortgage rate is due to households who locked in rates during lower-interest periods, including when the Fed cut the target range for the federal funds rate to near zero shortly after the pandemic took hold. Fixed-rate mortgages do dampen the effect of monetary policy, but, according to recent research, not as much as previously thought.3 There is a delay between when mortgage rates go up and when household mortgage payments go up, as shown infigure 7. Board staff research documents that mortgage payments go up over time because many households continue to refinance their mortgage or move. Despite higher rates, households in the U.S. borrowed over $1.5 trillion in new mortgage loans in 2023. These borrowers include first-time homebuyers, existing homeowners moving between homes, and homeowners obtaining cash-out refinances. The payment they owe on that recently obtained mortgage is higher than it would have been had lower rates been maintained, and their consumption may be correspondingly lower. The cumulative effect of a higher interest rate on aggregate mortgage payments grows over time as more new loans are originated at the higher rate. The staff's research documents that, historically, borrowers like these who are not deterred by higher rates are responsible for a little over half of the pass-through of interest rates to mortgage payments. ConclusionIn closing, let me reiterate why we care about housing. The housing sector is where many households have made, or will make, their largest investment. Therefore, the prices that families pay for that housing can affect their overall well-being. The work you do to make housing accessible is an important part of the economy. The housing sector is also a key part of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. That is one reason why policymakers will continue to pay close attention to this vital sector. Of course, no one sector dictates monetary policy. We look at the totality of the data to set policy and achieve the objectives given to the Fed by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. Considering the lagged effects of monetary policy, I am encouraged that over the past two years, we have made good progress toward our dual-mandate objectives. Thank you for your time and attention today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2024),Statement Regarding Reinvestment of Principal Payments from Treasury Securities, Agency Debt, and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities, May 1.Return to text 3. See, for example, Daniel Ringo (2024), "Inframarginal Borrowers and the Mortgage Payment Channel of Monetary Policy," working paper, May.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Third Conference on the International Roles of the U.S. Dollar, hosted by the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you, Beth Anne, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.1I would like to welcome everyone to this Third Conference on the International Roles of the U.S. Dollar, which is jointly organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Reserve Board. When people talk about the "dollar," they are referring to a number of roles it plays on the world stage—including a physical currency used worldwide, financial assets denominated or redeemable in U.S. dollars, or a settlement unit used in transactions. In all of these, the role of the U.S. dollar in global finance and its economic and financial stability implications are of elementary importance to Federal Reserve. Participants in the first and second installments of this conference discussed the different roles the dollar plays in the global economy and how the primacy of the dollar benefits not only the United States but also the rest of the world. U.S. households, for instance, benefit from lower transaction and borrowing costs, while U.S. businesses and the U.S. government benefit from deep financial markets, including a large pool of creditors and investors. Households and businesses in foreign economies also benefit from access to this broad pool of lenders and investors, which reduces their financing costs and fosters global economic growth. Despite all the benefits the dollar provides the United States and global economies and the efforts to mitigate some of the financial stability challenges posed by its dominant role, there has, for some time, been commentary predicting that the dollar is destined for demise—potentially an imminent demise. Such predictions have not materialized.2The dollar remains, by far, the most widely used currency across a variety of metrics, including as a store of value and a medium of exchange. However, the role of the United States in the world economy is changing, and finance is always changing, so I think it is important for policymakers to regularly consider if and why the dollar's role might change as well. This conference is a good venue to discuss some of the challenges and opportunities for the international use of the dollar in this ever-changing financial landscape. For instance, one of those challenges is the complex relationship between the dollar and geoeconomics, commonly defined as the interplay between economic and geopolitical tools and objectives. Rising geopolitical tensions, sanctions against Russia, China's efforts to bolster usage of the renminbi, and economic fragmentation all can affect the international use of the dollar, most visibly as a store of value and reflected in its use in official foreign exchange reserves. These same factors can also affect the dollar's role as a medium of exchange, such as in its use in trade invoicing, global banking, international debt issuance, and foreign exchange transactions. These topics will be addressed by two of our presenters today. Linda Goldberg will present a paper addressing the effects of geoeconomic tensions, focusing on the dollar's use in official foreign exchange reserves. Linda and her coauthors find that financial sanctions and geopolitical distance from the United States are associated with lower dollar shares in foreign exchange reserves. Looking more broadly, Ryan Chahrour will present work exploring the potential effects of escalating conflict and protectionism on the dollar's dominance in connection with efforts to promote the use of other currencies such as the renminbi. He and his coauthors find that both sanctions and policies that directly support the international role of the renminbi may reduce the prominence of the dollar if these sanctions and policies are long-lasting. The shifting cross-border payments landscape—including the rapid growth of digital currencies—could also pose challenges to the dominant role of the U.S. dollar. Angelo Ranaldo will provide an overview of aspects of that payments landscape, focusing on the world's largest multicurrency cash settlement system for foreign exchange, the Continuous Linked Settlement payment system, and its role in facilitating cross-border payments by reducing settlement risk. In the panel moderated by Michelle Neal this afternoon, the panelists will take a broader look at the current landscape of cross-border payment systems and how new technologies such as central bank digital currencies and faster transactions could potentially affect U.S. dollar usage and global capital flows. Stijn Claessens, in his keynote address, will expand on similar themes and pose questions that still need to be explored by researchers engaged on this topic. While recognizing that the U.S. dollar may face some challenges to its dominance in the future, we, as policymakers, are also attuned to the potential financial stability challenges that the current broad use of the U.S. dollar can pose for financial systems in the United States and the rest of the world. For example, past experiences show that foreign shocks can transmit to the United States when investors and governments seek a safe haven to protect the value of their assets in periods of stress. Such a "flight to the dollar" means that dollars are in especially high demand in funding markets around the globe during these episodes, as we saw during the Global Financial Crisis and the financial turmoil at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Federal Reserve supports the use of dollars internationally through our liquidity facilities, including the central bank liquidity swap lines, which provide foreign central banks with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to institutions in their jurisdictions. Scott Davis and Moritz Lenel will discuss the effectiveness of these swap lines in their respective papers. Using different approaches, they find that the availability of U.S. dollars through central bank swap lines mitigates the appreciation of the dollar with respect to other currencies in episodes of stress and reduces deviations from covered interest rate parity. This evidence suggests that the central bank swap lines not only ensure that credit continues to flow to U.S. households and businesses, but also that these swap lines have effects that enhance financial stability and, thus, the standing of the U.S. dollar as the dominant global currency. In closing, I would like to reiterate the importance of understanding how changes in the global landscape may affect the central role of the dollar in the global economy and financial system. I also want to thank you for taking the time to join the discussion over the next two days. This conference brings together world-class researchers, practitioners, and policymakers dedicated to understanding and addressing these important topics. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller, "The Dollar's International Role," speech delivered at "Climate, Currency, and Central Banking," a conference sponsored by the Global Interdependence Center and the University of the Bahamas, Nassau, Bahamas, February 15, 2024.Return to text