Governor Michelle W. Bowman At The Roundtable on the Lender of Last Resort: The 2023 Banking Crisis and COVID, sponsored by the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, Washington, D.C. Today's roundtable comes at an opportune time, as we recently passed the one-year anniversary of the failures of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and Signature Bank.1The long shadow of these bank failures, and the subsequent failure of First Republic, have prompted a great deal of discussion about the bank regulatory framework, including capital regulation, the approach to supervision, and the role of tailoring, among other topics. It is my hope that our discussion today reviews and considers the appropriate role of the Federal Reserve in providing liquidity to the U.S. banking system and, of course, its role as the "lender of last resort" through the discount window and authority under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. I look forward to today's panels and a deeper examination of important policy questions, including the lessons that should be learned from the banking system stress experienced last spring, the broader stress in financial markets during the COVID-19 crisis, potential approaches to operationally enhance and optimize tools like the discount window to more effectively meet industry liquidity needs, and the importance of effective resolution mechanisms in the banking system. Before the panels get into a "deep dive" on these policy issues, I would like to briefly touch on three main themes: (1) the broader framework in which the Federal Reserve supports liquidity in the banking system, particularly how this function complements other regulatory requirements and sources of liquidity; (2) how this function can be optimized to work within the evolving liquidity framework; and (3) the challenges we face in making the Federal Reserve's liquidity tools, particularly the discount window, effective. The Federal Reserve's Role in Banking System LiquidityThe complexity of the U.S. financial system makes it difficult to predict where the next stress (or in the worst case, the next crisis) will arise. While today's event will focus on recent episodes that required the Federal Reserve to employ its liquidity tools—the COVID crisis and the early 2023 banking stress—it is helpful to consider how the Federal Reserve's authority has evolved in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. Let's review the historical context, which could be helpful for framing the discussion. In 1913, Congress established the Federal Reserve at least in part to help address the pattern of cyclical financial panics and the ensuing economic turmoil that followed by allowing the Fed to create a more elastic money supply to meet demand for liquidity during times of stress. This authority included tools like open market operations, later used as a tool for monetary policy.2Since its establishment, the Federal Reserve was granted the authority to engage in discount window lending.3In addition, during the Great Depression, the Fed was given a broader set of tools to engage in emergency lending under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act.4 More recently, in 2003, the Federal Reserve restructured its previous discount window lending programs and established the Primary Credit Facility (PCF) and Secondary Credit Facility.5Primary credit enabled financially strong banks to obtain secured loans from the discount window at a penalty rate. The secondary credit provided discount window loans at a higher rate, and with higher collateral haircuts and other more stringent terms than apply for primary credit, to solvent institutions that did not qualify to borrow from the PCF.6This evolution of the discount window function more closely aligned operations with a theory, often attributed to Walter Bagehot, that central banks should lend freely to solvent institutions against good collateral, at a penalty rate of interest.7 The Fed used its lending tools extensively during the 2008 financial crisis. Relying heavily on discount window lending authority and emergency lending facilities under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, the Fed provided emergency liquidity to support individual firms that were under severe stress, and to facilitate the flow of credit more broadly. Of course, the financial crisis left a lasting imprint on many Americans who suffered significant economic harm, many of whom have not yet fully recovered. It also prompted Congress to review and amend the Fed's authorities through the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). The banking system today is stronger and more resilient than it was before the 2008 financial crisis with significantly more capital and substantially more liquidity. U.S. banks are also subject to a host of supervisory tools that did not exist prior to the Dodd-Frank Act, like new stress testing requirements.8Many of the regulatory changes implemented at that time were designed to reduce the probability of large bank failures, but the statute also mandated other changes designed to improve the likelihood that failing large banks could be resolved without broad systemic disruptions.9Of course, these changes were additive to existing authorities that are meant to promote banking system resilience, particularly the other core element of the federal safety net, deposit insurance.10 Congress also made significant changes to the Fed's emergency lending authority. For example, section 13(3) facilities must now be broad-based, rather than designed only for individual firms, and must be approved by the U.S. Treasury Secretary. In addition, loans can only be made to solvent institutions, and there are new collateral and disclosure requirements.11Further, while the Dodd-Frank Act preserved the Fed's ability to make discount window loans to eligible borrowers, including depository institutions and U.S. branches of foreign banks, it made some modifications. Notably, one change that I will return to later is the new requirement that discount window lending is no longer confidential. These loans, including the names of borrowing institutions, are now required to be disclosed with a two-year lag.12 Changes made by the new law and other subsequent changes have attempted to strike a balance between making firms more resilient to stress and adding additional parameters to the Fed's liquidity tools. The complementary tools we have—the prudential bank regulatory framework, tools to promote banking system liquidity and stability, discount window lending and "lender of last resort" authority, and resolution tools—all contribute to the safety and soundness of individual banks, and more broadly, to financial stability. Broadly defined, the challenge we face is that banking crises and banking stress can arise from unpredictable events. They can be the product of external events (like a global pandemic) or can arise from cascading failures of bank management and regulators to identify and effectively address and mitigate the buildup of risk. This risk can occur at a single institution, like we saw in the lead-up to the failure of SVB, or more broadly throughout the financial system, as we saw during the last financial crisis. When we consider banking system stress and potential crises in the broader context, our primary goal should always be prevention, particularly so that we can avoid contagion risks that lead to financial instability and more significant government intervention. We should be reluctant to intervene in private markets, including using emergency government lending facilities to support private enterprises. The federal safety net that covers the banking system—including discount window lending and deposit insurance—is meant to make the U.S. banking system and broader economy more resilient. Where market disruptions affect liquidity, it is important that these tools—particularly discount window lending—function effectively. So, we must ask whether there are steps we can take to optimize the functioning of these tools and identify some of the key challenges we face in making these tools effective, including preserving industry standard access to liquidity outside of the Fed's tools for day-to-day liquidity management, like advances from the Federal Home Loan Banks. Optimizing the Lender of Last Resort FunctionWhen we think about the Fed's lender of last resort function, we must think about the broader framework that supports bank liquidity, including liquidity regulation, bank supervision, deposit insurance, and day-to-day liquidity resources. While my discussion today focuses primarily on discount window lending, I will also briefly address design issues that we experienced with the recently expired Bank Term Funding Program. I think we can all agree that the discount window remains a critical tool, but it does not operate in isolation. It operates to support bank liquidity, but it is an additional resource in the federal safety net that allows eligible institutions to weather disruptions in liquidity markets and access other resources. First, there are questions about the utility of the discount window in light of its scope and the evolution of the banking system. There are a limited set of entities that have access to discount window loans, including depository institutions and, in unusual or exigent circumstances, designated financial market utilities.13As activities continue to migrate out of the regulated banking system, what are the implications of more activity occurring outside the banking system as it relates to the effectiveness of the discount window as a tool? Second, are there ways in which the Fed can enhance the technology, the operational readiness, and the services underpinning discount window loans to make sure that they are available when needed? Here, the events in the lead-up to the failure of SVB are illuminating—SVB experienced difficulty in accessing the discount window before its failure. We must understand and evaluate these difficulties and determine whether there are improvements the Federal Reserve System can make to ensure the discount window is an effective tool to provide liquidity support. Are there operational issues that can be improved, whether by improving the technology or extending business hours for the discount window and other Reserve Bank payment services like FedWire®and ACH (automated clearinghouse), particularly during times of stress? The Federal Reserve System must also take a close look at our operational readiness and capacity. Banking stress can manifest quickly and outside of regular business hours in different time zones, and we must make sure that the tools we have are available and prepared with trained and experienced staff ready to deal with the evolving risks of liquidity stress and pressure. Finally, are there changes that need to be made to support contingency liquidity on the borrower side? One prominent issue that has come to light recently is whether there should be some form of pre-positioning requirement—whether banking institutions should berequiredto hold collateral at the discount window, in anticipation of the need for accessing discount window loans in the future.14 Arguably, requiring pre-positioning at the discount window may serve a variety of purposes. One use case is ensuring the system is efficient enough to allow borrowers toaccessdiscount window loans in a timely manner, including by getting collateral to the discount window to support loans. We have much work to do on this front. To fulfill its function, the discount window must be able to provide liquidity quickly. The failure of SVB demonstrated how rapidly a run can occur and revealed that the discount window must be able to operate in a world in which new technologies, rapid communications, and the growth of real-time payments may exacerbate the speed of a bank run. Identifying and mitigating the technology and operational issues that affect the discount window should go a long way to addressing this concern. Understanding that these problems exist and requiring pre-positioning of collateral at the discount window may not fully address any technological and operational shortcomings of the discount window. But as a secondary matter, the notion of required collateral pre-positioning has also been proposed as a complementary liquidity requirement for banks, in part to ensure greater liquidity certainty to balance perceived "runnable" funding sources, as with SVB's significant proportion of uninsured deposits. While this could be an effective approach, we do not fully understand the consequences of a new pre-positioning requirement or whether, given the unique nature of SVB's business model and lax supervision, other institutions would have similarly runnable uninsured deposits or if this was an idiosyncratic event. Further, would required pre-positioning of collateral impede a bank's ability to manage its day-to-day liquidity needs (including from private sources at lower cost)? Would pre-positioning collateral increase operational risk, or otherwise change bank activities? Would there be any unintended consequences from requiring banks to encumber more assets on their balance sheets? More fundamentally—is a change of this magnitude, requiring a new daily management of discount window lending capacity, necessary and appropriate for all institutions, or are there particular bank characteristics that may warrant this additional layer of liquidity support? These are all important but as yet unanswered questions that need to be explored and understood before imposing such a radical shift. Currently, banks are not mandated to use the discount window to access liquidity. In fact, one of the core functions of bank management is to make the day-to-day decisions about how the institution will manage liquidity and other responsibilities. While it may be appropriate for supervisors to encourage banks to test contingency funding plans and to evaluate whether those plans are adequate in the context of examination, we must be cautious to not cross the line from supervisor to member of the management team and to avoid interfering with the decisionmaking of bank management by mandating across-the-board changes in response to the failure of a single unique institution. We need to ask whether having one standardized set of rules for institutions with different activities, risk profiles, and funding structures is the most efficient and effective way to support bank liquidity, particularly as we think about not only stressed conditions and liquidity disruptions in the market, but also day-to-day management and activities. ChallengesToday's panels will delve into the challenges and design problems that we confront in thinking about liquidity support of the banking system, and the special role of the Federal Reserve as lender of last resort. As a foundation for this discussion, I will briefly touch on a number of these challenges and issues. StigmaA long-standing challenge to the utility of discount window borrowing is the perception of stigma. During times of stress, signs of banking sector weakness are often magnified through small and independent actions of institutions, which may add to the reluctance to borrow from the central bank when other sources may be available. The perception of stigma existed long before the new Dodd-Frank disclosure requirements, and it is possible that public disclosure of the borrowing—even with a two-year delay—may create a greater deterrent. Regardless of the timing of the disclosure, the reality is that market participants have a strong interest in identifyinganypublic signals of bank financial health, including discount window lending. Even where the market is just making educated guesses about discount window lending (for example, by looking at public-facing liquidity management activities of banking institutions), the stigma risk can be an important consideration for banks trying to manage public perceptions of their financial condition. The Federal Reserve cannot entirely eliminate discount window borrowing stigma through regulatory fiat. One of the key sources of stigma seems to be the spectrum of reasons that a bank may choose to borrow from the discount window: the need for borrowing could be due to market disruptions in the provision of liquidity or a scarcity in the total amount of reserves in the banking system but could also indicate a specific borrower's growing financial stress. Of course, it is possible that a combination of factors may lead a bank to access the discount window—as stress on banking institutions builds, there may be a "pullback" on the ordinary liquidity tools banks use, accompanied by increased demands for liquidity. In this context, discount window lending becomes one additional data point for the market to interpret—while the signal it may send is unclear, one can easily imagine that the market may be skittish and fixate on any sign of financial weakness. The broader issue, however, is the health of the banking system and particular financial institutions, which can be affected by a number of other factors. For example, as we saw with SVB, the public messaging around the sale of securities and the prospective capital raised were both public announcements that altered the perception of the institution's financial health and risk profile. In short, while discount window "stigma" is an important issue, it is a subset of a broader concern—the perception of the institution's financial health—that each bank must confront as it manages its funding resources, risk profile, and liquidity. At the same time, we should explore ways that the Federal Reserve can work to mitigate stigma concerns. In some ways, thedesignof primary discount window credit, where a borrower must meet financial standards for borrowing, suggest that the "market signal" of discount window borrowing should perhaps speak more toward market liquidity disruption than an individual institution's financial condition. We should explore ways to validate the use of discount window lending in our regulatory framework. While the federal banking agencies have encouraged institutions to be prepared to access discount window loans, we should also seriously consider whether we should finally recognize discount window borrowing capacity in our assessment of a firm's liquidity resources, including in meeting a firm's obligations under the Liquidity Coverage Ratio.15 One of the emerging arguments about how the Federal Reserve can mitigate stigma concerns is simply by mandating that banks pre-position collateral and periodically borrow from the discount window. The notion is that the "signaling" effect of discount window borrowing becomes more muted when more participants are essentially forced to use it to meet a regulatory requirement or a supervisory expectation. I question whether this approach will truly address the underlying stigma concern. The discount window has not historically functioned as a source of ordinary day-to-day liquidity for the banking system, but rather as a backup liquidity resource and it is priced as such. Our expectation should not be that the Federal Reserve replaces existing sources of market liquidity for banks in normal times. As a source ofbackupliquidity, the question becomes whether requiring pre-positioned collateral would mitigate the stigma ofdrawingon the discount window. To be effective, banks must be willing to obtaindiscount window loans when needed, and it is not clear that required pre-positioning or even testing requirements will address the perceived stigma associated with a bank's need to access the discount window for emergency liquidity purposes. The market will continue to take signal from a bank's external activities in liquidity markets—and try to extrapolate whether a bank is using the discount window—and draw a negative inference from this borrowing. Broad-based Approach to Bank LiquidityThe discount window is a small but important element of bank liquidity, but banks manage liquidity in many ways for day-to-day business needs and during times of market stress. Considering discount window reform narrowly ignores the interrelationships among various liquidity resources, liquidity requirements and regulations, and liquidity planning. Building resiliency in the financial system requires policymakers to think about these variables together, ensuring that reforms are rational and contribute to a complementary liquidity framework. The complexity of liquidity issues warrants a broad-based review before we embark on piecemeal changes. That review should endeavor to understand not only the need for reform, but also the tradeoffs of different approaches, including the economic cost. However, the proposed change raises many questions about not only cost and effectiveness, but also unintended consequences. Another example is the use of Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances by some banks as a supplemental source of liquidity, and how this resource functions along the continuum of day-to-day liquidity management to instances of widespread stress in the banking system and among individual firms. The FHLBs are an important source of liquidity for many banks. At the same time, the operational design of FHLB advances make these advances poorly suited to function as emergency liquidity support for the banking system. By contrast, the Fed's discount window lending authority, and the flexible authority to lend under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, place the Fed well to function as the lender of last resort in support of banking system liquidity during times of stress. A Note on the Design of Emergency Lending Facilities: The Bank Term Funding ProgramBefore closing, I would like to briefly reflect on events we saw this winter, when design flaws with the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) were first identified. On March 12, 2023, the Federal Reserve, with the approval of the Treasury Secretary, announced the creation of the BTFP, which was designed to make additional funding available to institutions to "help assure banks have the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors."16This program was initially authorized to make new loans for a full year, even though at the time, it was not clear that "unusual and exigent" circumstances would continue to exist for a full year that would warrant the ongoing availability of loans under the program.17 Under the BTFP, eligible depository institutions were able to pledge Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities—valued at par—to obtain one-year loans. This program allowed institutions to avoid selling those assets to generate additional liquidity. By valuing the collateral at par—when the market value had declined due to the rising interest rate environment—the program allowed eligible borrowers to obtain a greater amount of liquidity than they would have been able to by simply pledging collateral to the discount window. These generous collateral terms were accompanied by generous rate terms and prepayment flexibility. As originally designed, the interest rate for loans under the program was set at the one-year overnight index swap rate, plus 10 basis points.18Borrowers were also entitled to prepay loans at any time without penalty.19As has been well documented, the combination of these terms over time created a significant arbitrage opportunity, which the Fed sensibly cut off as the program was approaching the end of its term for originating new loans.20 We must learn from this experience. When we identify flaws in program design or ways to improve our tools in the future, we should avail ourselves of the knowledge we have learned through experience, including by shutting down an authorized section 13(3) facility when it is no longer needed, and lending at a true penalty rate so the usage of the facility naturally declines as market conditions normalize. Closing ThoughtsAs regulatory attention turns toward the liquidity framework and liquidity regulation, I expect we will see a growing momentum to "do something" that would help address the banking stress from 2023. While some reforms may be necessary, we should think about the response to banking stress more broadly. We should continue to focus on improving the targeted approach of supervision, to enhance the "prevention" of banking system stress. We should think about the liquidity framework in a broad-based manner to ensure that the available tools, resources, and requirements are working in a complementary way. And we should understand what changes we need to make discount window lending and other emergency lending programs more efficient and effective. Thank you for the opportunity to take part in this important and timely discussion, and for the participation of our esteemed panelists in this important event. I look forward to hearing the panelists' perspectives. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Federal Reserve Act, ch. 6, 38 Stat. 251 (1913).Return to text 3. Federal Reserve Discount Window, "General Information: The Primary & Secondary Lending Programs."Return to text 4. Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act was added bysection 210 of the Emergency Relief and Construction Act of 1932.Return to text 5. Mark Carlson and Jonathan D. Rose, "Stigma and the Discount Window," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 19, 2017).Return to text 6. Carlson and Rose, "Stigma and the Discount Window."Return to text 7. Walter Bagehot,Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market(New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, [1873] 1897).Return to text 8. 12 U.S.C. § 5365(i) (2010).Return to text 9. 12 U.S.C. § 5365(d) (2010).Return to text 10. The Dodd-Frank Act also increased the deposit insurance limit from $100,000 to $250,000. See Pub. L. No. 111–203, 124 Stat. 1540 (2010), § 335; 12 U.S.C. § 1821(a)(1)(E).Return to text 11. Dodd-Frank Act, Pub. L. No. 111–203, 124 Stat. 2113, 2118 (2010), §§ 1101 and 1103.Return to text 12. Dodd-Frank Act, Pub. L. No. 111–203, 124 Stat. 2118 (2010), § 1103(b).Return to text 13. Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. 347b; and Dodd-Frank Act, 12 U.S.C. 5465(b). For designated financial market utilities, this would require an affirmative vote by a majority of the Board after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury.Return to text 14. See Acting Comptroller of the Currency Michael J. Hsu, "Building Better Brakes for a Faster Financial World (PDF)" (speech at the Columbia Law School, January 18, 2024); and Working Group on the 2023 Banking Crisis,Bank Failures and Contagion: Lender of Last Resort, Liquidity, and Risk Management(PDF)(Washington: Group of Thirty, January 2024).Return to text 15. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Update Guidance on Liquidity Risks and Contingency Planning," news release, July 28, 2023. "The updated guidance encourages depository institutions to incorporate the discount window as part of their contingency funding plans. Consistent with other contingency funding sources, the guidance reinforces the supervisory expectation that if the discount window is part of a depository institution's contingency funding plans, the depository institution should establish and maintain operational readiness to use the discount window, which includes conducting periodic transactions."Return to text 16. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Announces It Will Make Available Additional Funding to Eligible Depository Institutions to Help Assure Banks Have the Ability to Meet the Needs of All Their Depositors," news release, March 12, 2023.Return to text 17. See section 13(3)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. § 343(3)(A).Return to text 18. "Bank Term Funding Program (PDF)," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 12, 2023.Return to text 19. "Bank Term Funding Program."Return to text 20. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Announces the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) Will Cease Making New Loans as Scheduled on March 11," news release, January 24, 2024. "As the program ends, the interest rate applicable to new BTFP loans has been adjusted such that the rate on new loans extended from now through program expiration will be no lower than the interest rate on reserve balances in effect on the day the loan is made. This rate adjustment ensures that the BTFP continues to support the goals of the program in the current interest rate environment. This change is effective immediately." See "How America Accidentally Made a Free-Money Machine for Banks,"The Economist,January 18, 2024, https://www.economist.com/leaders/2024/01/18/how-america-accidentally-made-a-free-money-machine-for-banks.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At A Workshop on the Future of Banking, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri Good morning. Before I provide some context for today's discussions, I would like to thank all of our participants who are here with us today in Kansas City at the Reserve Bank, and those participating remotely. Most importantly, I'd like to thank our host, President Schmid, and his excellent research staff, all of whom helped to organize today's event. I especially appreciate the opportunity to highlight a few specific areas that concern me about the currently regulatory trajectory and their effects on the future of banking.1 Today's workshop addresses timely and important questions, including the forces that will shape the future of the banking system, entry into the banking system, bank mergers and acquisitions, and the state of competition including both the direct and indirect competition banks experience and how regulators measure and assess competition—or at least how we broadly measure it today. The failures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank just over a year ago, and the stress to the banking system that ensued, caused many institutions to retrench and prompted regulators to renew their focus on bank regulatory and supervisory policy and approach. Banks responded by enhancing their focus on fundamental risks like interest rate and liquidity risk, adopting a more conservative posture in both risk management and lending. This self-reflection by both industry and regulators continues today. In fact, the long shadow of the bank failures continues to be a driving force for regulatory and supervisory reforms, even for reform proposals that have little relationship to the events surrounding the bank failures and ensuing banking system stress. As I have noted in the past, the regulatory reform agenda, and the less visible but no less important changes to the supervisory process, touch on a wide range of topics that directly and indirectly affect banks of all sizes.2The sheer volume of changes presents challenges to regulated institutions. Outside of the largest banks, how does bank management review and provide meaningful comment on voluminous regulatory changes? When those changes are finalized, how does a bank's management reallocate resources to ensure a capability to comply with revised regulations? Are banks, especially small banks, able to locate and retain qualified staff to understand and implement these increasingly complex and burdensome rules? How does a bank's management and compliance officer adjust to supervisory standards and expectations that may be significantly different from exam to exam or regulator to regulator? The 2023 bank failures and circumstances leading up to those failures continue to warrant review, self-reflection, and appropriately targeted changes to identified issues or failures in regulation and supervision. But we should ask whether the volume of reforms that have been proposed, recently finalized, or that are in the pipeline, reflect appropriate prioritization. Or instead, do they suggest that we have lost our focus on furthering the primary goal of prudential bank regulation and supervision—promoting a safe and sound banking system and fostering a thriving banking industry that effectively supports local and regional economies. I am concerned that the broad-based and insufficiently focused reform agenda has become a growing source of risk to the banking system, particularly due to the rushed nature of these reform efforts and the lack of research and understanding of the intended and unintended consequences of these proposals.3This reform agenda, for both regulation and supervision, is the backdrop for today's panel discussions. Regulatory Approvals in the Banking SystemI have previously spoken about the regulatory dynamics shaping the future of the banking system, from bank capital requirements to liquidity reform, significant revisions to the Community Reinvestment Act, a regulatory attack on banks charging fees for services (including debit card interchange fees), the trend of dialing supervision up to "11" for banks of all sizes, increased competition from non-banks, the continued migration of certain activities from regulated banks to non-banks outside of the banking system, and the ongoing erosion of tailoring.4These issues continue to shape the contours of the banking system—including bank size, the activities in which they engage, and where activities occur within the broader financial system. The policy decisions embedded in these regulatory reforms, even if only in the form of a proposal, have already begun shaping the U.S. banking system. Revisions to the regulatory and supervisory framework reflect policy decisions about not only the risk tolerance of regulators, but also the role of banks in the banking system and the broader U.S. economy. These policy decisions create incentives and impacts that we must acknowledge and understand. When policymakers flatten and standardize regulations and supervisory expectations, we create strong incentives for banks to achieve greater economies of scale through merger and make it harder for new banks to successfully compete with existing banks. When we "raise the bar" for banks to engage in certain activities in a way that is disproportionate to the risk of those activities, we create incentives for those activities to migrate to non-banks outside of the regulatory perimeter. We must understand whether the policy decisions embedded in the regulatory and supervisory framework are effective and complementary. If they are not, we must acknowledge the consequences of knowingly implementing conflicting policy choices. De Novo Bank FormationI continue to be concerned about the decline in the number of banks in the U.S. As I have noted in the past, there are several indications that there is an unmet demand for new bank creation indicated by the ongoing preference for "charter strip" acquisitions, the ongoing shift of activities out of the banking system, and the rising demand for banking-as-a-service partnerships.5 For the past decade, de novo bank formation has been largely stagnant, even as the banking industry has rapidly evolved over the same time period. Many factors influence the pursuit of de novo bank charters, including the interest rate environment, business opportunities, the intense competition for qualified bank management and staff, and potentially less onerous alternatives for financial services providers to operate outside of the regulated banking system. The decision to form a de novo bank is also informed by normal business considerations including identifying investors, establishing a viable business plan, and ensuring the ability to navigate the "start-up" phase of a new bank and manage upfront operational costs, all while being subjected to intense supervisory oversight over the first several years of de novo bank operation. Yet, perhaps the most important factor that influences de novo bank formation is the regulatory and supervisory framework, which includes the application process and receipt of regulatory approval. The application process can be a significant obstacle to de novo bank formation. Applications often experience significant delays between the initial charter application filing with the chartering authority and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) application for deposit insurance. The timeframe for receiving all of the required regulatory approvals to open for business often takes well in excess of a year. Of course, this uncertainty must be endured after initial capital has been raised, shareholders identified, and a management team ready to begin work. As one can imagine, these delays can present unique challenges for de novo founders including incurring more start-up expenses than anticipated, having difficulty recruiting and retaining qualified management to obtain approval, and experiencing challenges raising additional start-up capital investment. Some of the uncertainty surrounding the de novo process flows from supervisory perceptions of this proposed business model. For example, a de novo business plan that focuses on providing banking-as-a-service outside of a defined geographic footprint presents different risks than a business model that focuses on retail banking in an underserved market. It stands to reason that the regulatory expectations for each business model, including capital levels, risk management, and compliance, will vary. Even controlling for the variability in business model, the standards and expectations for a de novo application that will be viewed and treated favorably are opaque and may shift significantly over time, even between and among the regulators. The absence of de novo bank formation over the long run will create a void in the banking system, a void that may contribute to a decline in the availability of reliable and fairly priced credit, the absence of financial services in underserved markets, and the continued shift of banking activities beyond the regulatory perimeter. Bank Mergers and AcquisitionsA more immediate concerning influence is the dramatically evolving approach to bank mergers and acquisitions (M&A) by some prudential regulators. It is helpful to consider bank M&A broadly, to include not only bank-to-bank mergers subject to approval under the Bank Merger Act, but also the broader set of business combinations contemplated under sections 3 and 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act, and under section 10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act.6 These M&A transactions allow banks to thrive in our dynamic banking system, and help to promote the long-term health and viability of banks. M&A also ensures that some institutions have a meaningful path to transitioning bank ownership. In the absence of a viable M&A framework, we increase the potential for additional risks including limited opportunities for succession planning, especially in smaller or rural communities and zombie banks that continue to exist but have no competitive viability or exit strategy. M&A reform is currently a popular topic on the banking agency regulatory agenda with the process and standards regulators employ to review and approve transactions under intense scrutiny. Recently some of the federal banking regulators have proposed or described new M&A policy approaches, with the Department of Justice currently reviewing how it enforces section 7 of the Clayton Act.7 As regulators revisit the evaluation standards for bank M&A transactions under the statutory framework, we should consider whether the regulatory review process is fair, transparent, and consistent with applicable statutes. This should begin with an important threshold question—what are the identified shortcomings with the current process or standards, and are the proposed reforms targeted and effective to address these shortcomings? One concern that has been raised about the M&A regulatory approval process seems largely based on the misconception that a lack of applicationdenialsimplies that standards are simply not rigorous enough, that the regulatory approval process has become a rubber stamp. This view ignores the reality of the filing process. These transactions require significant upfront and ongoing investment and commitment of resources. At the outset, this includes finding an appropriate acquisition target, conducting due diligence, and negotiating the terms of the transaction. Once a target is identified, the banks must prepare appropriate regulatory filings, engage with regulators during the application process, and prepare for post-approval business processes including scheduling necessary and costly systems conversions and customer transition. This is an expensive and reputationally risky process that bankers take extremely seriously. They do not make the decision to file an application lightly. Even for those institutions that decide to proceed with an application, success is not guaranteed, even in the absence of a regulatory denial. The Federal Reserve's most recent report on banking applications activity identifies a significant portion of bank M&A transactions in which applications have been withdrawn.8 In its recent proposal, one agency suggested that if an applicant withdraws a filing, that agency's board may release a statement regarding the concerns with the application in the interest of creating transparency for future applicants.9I have observed that applicants may withdraw a filing for a number of reasons, including prolonged uncertainty due to regulatory delays, expiration of contractual deadlines, and issues that are uncovered only during the processing of the application (for example, the issuance of updated supervisory ratings from recently completed examinations). As a general matter, this approach could evolve to become the expectation forallwithdrawn applications, and, if so, could put regulators in the untenable position of needing to disclose confidential supervisory information or nonpublic business information about applicants even in the case of a withdrawn application. Just as in the de novo bank formation process, one of the key risks to an effective M&A process is a lack of timely regulatory action. The consequences of delays can significantly harm both the acquiring institution and the target, causing greater operational risk (including the risk of a failed merger), increased expenses, reputational risk, and staff attrition in the face of prolonged uncertainty. Reducing the efficiency of bank M&A can be a deterrent to healthy bank transactions—it can reduce the effectiveness of M&A activity that preserves the presence of community banks in underserved areas, prevent institutions from pursuing prudent growth strategies, and actually undermine competition by preventing firms from growing to a larger scale, effectively creating a "protected class" of larger institutions. Given all of these considerations, it seems reasonable to assume that the uncertainty of the M&A process itself may act as a deterrent to de novo bank formation, as potential bank founders stay on the sidelines knowing that future exit strategies—like the strategic acquisition of a de novo bank by a larger peer—may face long odds of success. We must not foreclose bank merger activities that are permitted by law and that are necessary to maintain a healthy banking system. Instead, we should focus on ensuring that we can improve the speed and timeliness of regulatory decisionmaking, applying review standards that are reasonable and consistent with the statutory framework. Too often it seems that regulators discount the fact that these organizations do not simply hit the pause button during the merger review process. We must remember that these organizations are businesses that continue to operate and must do so in a way that supports their ongoing business operations and future growth. Unfortunately, the past year has shown that regulatory attention is increasingly focused on other issues, with the timeliness of regulatory action appearing to be lower on the list of priorities. These efforts have not improved the outlook for the bank merger process. Pending reform efforts may actually exacerbate the existing problems, resulting in an increase in the already significant delays in processing times for some applications. Uncertainty in the standards for an application review can drive delays. A federal agency recently indicated that it may deviate from the longstanding approach to evaluating competitive effects of a merger using a deposit-based analysis. While this analysis could be retained as an initial screen, that agency would "evaluate the competitive effects of a proposed merger in a manner that is most relevant to each transaction," and "may consider concentrations in any specific products or customer segments…."10I imagine bankers contemplating merger transactions will have little capacity to evaluate whether a merger would raise regulatory issues in advance under this open-ended standard. That proposal also includes revisions to the convenience and needs analysis that may frustrate banks' ability not only to receive regulatory approval, but to manage their businesses going forward. Specifically, the proposal notes that applicants should be "prepared to make commitments regarding future retail banking services in the community to be served for at least three years following consummation of the merger."11The proposal also suggests that the resulting bank would be expected to "better" meet the convenience and needs of the community to be served than it would absent the merger.12As is the current expectation, a bank should expect to provide information on their plans for activities and branches as part of the application process. But we should acknowledge that those plans may change over time as conditions evolve. A bank's future activities, whether banking or branching, are subject to regulatory requirements, and oversight through ongoing supervision activities. We need not operate like the applications process is the only tool available to address policy concerns. I expect this proposal would greatly benefit from public input. Even reported data on current merger processing times may understate the broader application processing timeline. This process often includes preliminary discussions and pre-filings with regulators, and delays between the time an application is filed and when it is "accepted" by the regulator triggering the regulatory processing clock.13 Finally, the M&A process can be inappropriately influenced when regulators make demands on firms that are not squarely grounded in statutory approval requirements or based on safety and soundness considerations. During the application deliberation process, regulators can impose limitations or restrictions to address specific supervisory or policy concerns in the form of "conditions" or "commitments" on the approval. While this can be an important tool, it should not be used to replace rulemaking or existing regulations and statutes that guide regulatory action; we should not engage in "regulation by application." Conditions or commitments that impose obligations that are inconsistent with our existing regulatory framework raise issues of significant concern.14In these circumstances, our existing rules and regulations are the most appropriate and effective tools to address concerns. Closing ThoughtsPolicymakers continue to play an important role in shaping the future of the banking system, not only through policy choices on substantive regulations and supervisory approaches, but also through their role in bank formations, mergers, and acquisitions. We currently have a dynamic banking system, but these individual pieces of the bank regulatory framework do not function independently. The policy choices embodied in current regulation and supervision, and in proposed reforms, aggregate to influence the future of the banking system, often in ways that are unpredictable, and at times in ways that are in conflict and internally inconsistent. I hope that today's discussions provide an opportunity to have frank conversations about the dynamics shaping the future of the banking system. And throughout, that we identify opportunities to rationalize regulatory approaches, and ensure that the values regulators say they support—like the importance of a broad and diverse banking system that includes institutions of all sizes serving all of the different market segments across the country—are consistent with regulatory actions. I am concerned that many of these actions may actually undermine the long-term viability of banks. I look forward to hearing the insights of all of our participants today, and thinking more deeply about how regulation, supervision, and ongoing reform efforts can help to positively influence a banking system that will effectively and efficiently serve communities of all sizes, consumers, businesses, and the broader U.S. economy long into the future. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the New Jersey Bankers Association Annual Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, New Jersey, March 7, 2024).Return to text 3. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency recently passed an interim final rule to extend the applicability date of certain provisions in the recent amendments to the Community Reinvestment Act regulations. The need for these delays to important and controversial elements of the final rule illustrates the rushed, overly complex, and unwieldy nature of the Community Reinvestment Act rulemaking. See dissenting statement of Governor Michelle W. Bowman, "Statement on the Interim Final Rule and Final Rule Amending the Community Reinvestment Act Regulations" March 21, 2024.Return to text 4. Michelle W. Bowman, "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform (PDF)," (speech at Protect Main Street sponsored by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, DC, January 17, 2024); "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, FL, February 27, 2024); "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the New Jersey Bankers Association Annual Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, NJ, March 7, 2024); "Tailoring, Fidelity to the Rule of Law, and Unintended Consequences (PDF)," (speech at the Harvard Law School Faculty Club, Cambridge, MA, March 5, 2024).Return to text 5. See Michelle W. Bowman, "The Consequences of Fewer Banks in the U.S. Banking System (PDF)," (speech at the Wharton Financial Regulation Conference, Philadelphia, PA, April 14, 2023).Return to text 6. 12 U.S.C. §§ 1467a, 1842, 1843.Return to text 7. Jonathan Kanter, "Merger Enforcement Sixty Years After Philadelphia National Bank" (keynote Address at the Brookings Institution's Center on Regulation and Markets Event, Promoting Competition in Banking, Washington, DC, June 20 2023); Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Business Combinations Under the Bank Merger Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,"OCC Bulletin2024-4, January 29, 2024; Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "FDIC Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Revisions to its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions," news release, March 21, 2024.Return to text 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report (PDF), June 1 – June 30, 2023, Vol. 10, No. 2 (Washington: Board of Governors, September 2023). This report notes that in the first half of 2023, 46 M&A applications were approved by the Federal Reserve, while 12 such applications were withdrawn.Return to text 9. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Press Release, "FDIC Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Revisions to its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions," March 21, 2024, at 74.Return to text 10. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Press Release, "FDIC Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Revisions to its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions," March 21, 2024, at 75-76.Return to text 11. Id., at 42-43.Return to text 12. Id., at 82.Return to text 13. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, FL, February 27, 2024).Return to text 14. See Michelle W. Bowman,Statement on Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Resolution Requirements for Large Banks and Application by U.S. Bancorp, October 14, 2022.Return to text
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Matteo. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the 13th International Research Forum on Monetary Policy. The vibrant discussions you will engage in at this conference, and your research more broadly, will help us to understand better the origins and implications of uncertainty. I became a member of the Federal Reserve Board just as it was grappling with the economic after-effects of the pandemic, a once-in-a-century disturbance of worldwide significance. As a result, I know from firsthand experience that understanding the main sources of uncertainty and how best to make monetary policy decisions in the presence of uncertainty are crucial to policymaking. I will take this opportunity to do a couple of things. First, I will review a few historical examples of how economic thinking on monetary policymaking in the presence of uncertainty has evolved. Second, I will consider lessons learned from these examples that could influence how monetary policymakers think about the policy choices the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) faces currently.1 The 1960s to the 1980sIn the 1960s, during the heyday of Keynesian macroeconomics, researchers widely believed that monetary policymakers faced a long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, and that the tradeoff could be calibrated to keep unemployment indefinitely low at an acceptable cost in terms of higher inflation. Improvements in econometric modeling abounded, and the harnessing ofoptimal-controlmethods developed in the field of engineering held out the prospect that business cycle fluctuations could be stabilized. There were contrarians, of course, most notably Milton Friedman, who highlighted the necessity of monetary policymakers to consider what theydon'tknow in their decisionmaking process (Friedman, 1968). Friedman's statement that monetary policy works with "long and variable lags" was, among other things, an argument against policymakers trying to fine-tune the level of economic activity. In recognition of policymakers' limited knowledge of short-run economic relationships, Friedman advocated the use of simple rules for monetary policy, such as thek-percent money growth rule. He argued that rules that focused on monetary growth and that eschewed direct feedback on macroeconomic variables would work reasonably well, on average, and avoid the hubris of fine-tuning policy in a dynamic and uncertain world. History proved Friedman right in his take on the importance of uncertainty, even if his prescription of ak-percent money growth rule fared less well. During roughly the same period when Friedman authored his famous presidential address to the American Economic Association disputing the purported long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, William Brainard published an influential paper on the implications of uncertainty. Brainard (1967) argued that uncertainty about the power of monetary policy implied that policy should respond more cautiously to shocks than would be the case if this uncertainty did not exist. Brainard'sattenuation principleis a classic example of what is today known as the Bayesian approach to uncertainty.2The Brainard approach to uncertainty consisted of two steps. The first step is to compute the optimal policy for a world without uncertainty; that is, thecertainty equivalencecase. The second step is to adjust that policy response to account for the particular uncertainty under study. One strand of research followed these steps through the 1970s and beyond.3A parallel strand of research that embraced at least part of the message of Friedman was also under way. It bypassed the optimal policy benchmark altogether, on the grounds that uncertainty is pervasive, and sought instead to find simple rules that performed well across a large class of models and for a large range of conditions. Brainard's insight was important. There are many circumstances in which the principle of gradualism applies, but as I will discuss later, economic research has also found that there are circumstances in which the presence of uncertainty does not warrant a gradual policy response. The 1990s and 2000sJumping ahead to the 1990s, a "new economy" was emerging. The unemployment rate was below what many analysts at the time judged to be its natural rate, and many FOMC participants and others were forecasting growth above the economy's potential. Chairman Alan Greenspan, however, suspected that technological advances and other forces were fostering a "new economy" of sustained high productivity growth that would allow a period of persistently low unemployment without generating inflationary pressure. In the absence of hard evidence to the contrary, he was able to persuade the FOMC to go along with him by implicitly employing the Bayesian logic of Brainard's attenuation principle with a disarmingly simple suggestion: Let's just wait one more meeting and see. Chairman Greenspan repeated this message as inflation fell from above 2 percent in 1996 to below 2 percent in 1997 and 1998 while the economy added 9.3 million jobs, and the FOMC raised the federal funds rate just once.4 Around the same time, there was an explosion of interest insimple policy rulesfor monetary policy, beginning, in most people's reckoning, with the rule John Taylor (1993) published in the early 1990s. These simple feedback rules, which specify how central banks' policy instrument would respond to the state of the economy, differed from their predecessors by replacing monetary aggregates as the instrument of monetary policy with a short-term policy interest rate. This research embraced the message that restricting feedback to a small number of key macroeconomic variables would result in more robust outcomes than adhering to the prescriptions of, say, optimal-control policies, which in essence imposed feedback on all aspects of these models.5Whether much of the robustness gains of simple rules can be realized when central banks only use such rules as "guides" for monetary policy is a topic worthy of further research.6 The claimed robustness of simple rules across a set of fixed models is arguably only part of their appeal. Another part is the notion that their parsimony presumably makes simple rules relatively easy for households, businesses, and financial market participants to learn. One useful finding was that gradualism in policy setting, in the form of a sizable weight on the lagged policy rate in the policy rule, is helpful for facilitating learnability.7In any event, the literature on learning in macroeconomics extended the dimension of uncertainty for monetary policymakers from the cross section of candidate models to the time dimension of any given model. The bulk of the early literature assumed private-sector decisionmakers were knowledgeable, rational agents, while policymakers lacked detailed knowledge of the structure of the economy. The assumed imbalance of information and knowledge was striking. It was usually assumed, sometimes only implicitly, that private agents understood not only the economic environment in which they operated, but also the policy regime that was in place. Considering this background, some more recent contributions explored two related departures from the assumption of a fixed model with uncertain parameters: time-variation in the true (population) model, and private agents learning about the economy. As I just observed, the rational expectations paradigm presupposes that economic agents have a great deal of knowledge about their environment, but policymakers do not know the true (population) parameters of the models they use. Instead, they must use estimates of those parameters. As Sargent (1993) noted, it makes sense to assume that the decisionmakers within the models that policymakers employ are no more sophisticated than the econometricians who estimate them. Doing so means accepting that the true (population) parameters of one's model could be time varying—the outcome of the interplay between shocks, uncertainty, learning, and policy. That realization changes the way you think about monetary policy. How might this matter? Let me give you one example. As many of you know, econometricians have found sizable declines in recent decades in the response of inflation to the unemployment rate.8Taken at face value, these declines in the slope of the Phillips curve have important implications for the optimal conduct of monetary policy. But what should policymakers take from such econometric results? Some researchers argue that the apparent decline in the response to slack in the Phillips curve could be a manifestation of the improved control of inflation by the central bank.9That is, policymakers could be "victims of their own success" in the sense that good performance in controlling inflation over the Great Moderation period may have weakened the information content of the data. Now, take this notion a step further, as a strand of the literature does, and suppose that private agents within our models are themselves skeptical—that is, that they have doubts about their methods for formulating expectations and making decisions, and that they act accordingly. Economists now have new means of modeling uncertainty bothwithina given model andacrossa set of rival models. These methods draw on theories ofambiguity aversion.10Under ambiguity aversion, agents are particularly concerned about types of uncertainties that do not lend themselves to being represented in terms of probabilities. Agents' choices are motivated, in part, by an incentive to minimize the adverse consequences of these types of uncertainties. The ambiguity aversion approach to uncertainty suggests that to protect against uncertainty over which a policymaker is unwilling or unable to attach prior probabilities, the appropriate response is often anti-attenuation; that is, policy should applystrongermonetary medicine than in the certainty equivalence case. For the reasons I have outlined, there are circumstances when uncertainty might appropriately induce a gradual response and other circumstances when a nongradual response to uncertainty may be justified. Furthermore, under either the Bayesian approach or the ambiguity aversion approach, the best response to uncertainty is context specific and can vary over time.11Sometimes the context leads to the same conclusion, broadly speaking, regardless of the approach. One case of perennial interest to central bankers is inflation persistence where the Bayesian approach, the ambiguity aversion approach, and its close cousin, robust control, all tend to lead to policy that is stronger than the certainty equivalent case to forestall the possibility of inflationary forces becoming embedded in inflation expectations.12Another case is that of crisis periods. The Global Financial CrisisTake, for example, the Global Financial Crisis of 2008. During this period, the tension between caution, on the one hand, and vigorous action, on the other, as a way to conduct monetary policy in the face of uncertainty was evident. In September 2007, the FOMC decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to "forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial markets" and noted that "developments in financial markets since the Committee's last regular meeting have increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook."13In subsequent meetings, the FOMC gradually lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points and, in January 2008, decided to quicken its pace by lowering the target by 75 basis points in an unscheduled meeting and by 50 basis points, 75 basis points, and 25 basis points in subsequent meetings. Inflation, however, was rising over that period. By June 2008, it was well over 2 percent and still increasing, and the FOMC paused its rate cutting. It was a decision that weighed the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations with the downside risks to economic growth.14In September 2008, the circumstances changed precipitously, as did the FOMC's approach to policy. The Committee quickly cut the federal funds rate effectively to zero and took extraordinary steps to stabilize the financial system and support the economy. The motivation to respond assertively to the emerging crisis, and the uncertainty surrounding it, was no doubt accentuated by the knowledge that future policy actions might be circumscribed by a lengthy spell of the funds rate at its lower bound, which would magnify losses associated with adverse outcomes.15My conclusion, as Chair Powell mentioned in a speech in 2018, is that during crisis periods, words like "we will do whatever it takes" will likely be more effective than "we will take cautious steps."16 Lessons LearnedSome clear lessons flow from the history that I have summarized. First, when uncertainty is high, policymakers should sometimes act quickly and should sometimes act cautiously. The right action depends on the circumstances. Second, while simple monetary policy rules are appealing for several reasons, rigid adherence to the prescriptions of simple rules is unwarranted. Historically, policymakers have only used rules as "guides" or benchmarks in setting policy, and there are good reasons for this. It is clearly beneficial to look at the totality of the data to identify changes in the economy in real time, to embrace the risk-management considerations associated with uncertainty that factor into FOMC decisions, and to adapt policy to the evolution of the economy. Third, in the presence of a high degree of uncertainly, policymakers benefit from a healthy dose of humility. There are limits to what we know about the economy, especially after periods of economic upheaval such as a pandemic. Current SituationReflecting on the situation we are facing today, over the past year, inflation has come down significantly but is still running above the FOMC's 2 percent goal. In March, headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was 2.7 percent over the past 12 months based on the Federal Reserve's staff estimates. A year earlier, it was 4.4 percent. Core PCE inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components, stood at 2.8 percent; a year ago, it was 4.8 percent. While we have seen considerable progress in lowering inflation, the job of sustainably restoring 2 percent inflation is not yet done. Real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2023 was 3.4 percent, and I expect first-quarter economic growth to slow down but remain solid as indicated by the solid growth in retail sales in March and February. Recent readings on both job gains and inflation have come in higher than expected. The economy added an average of 276,000 nonfarm jobs per month in the three months through March, a faster pace than we have seen since last March. And the inflation data over the past three months were above the low readings in the second half of last year. My baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further, with the policy rate held steady at its current level, and that the labor market will remain strong, with labor demand and supply continuing to rebalance. Of course, the outlook is still quite uncertain, and if incoming data suggest that inflation is more persistent than I currently expect it to be, it will be appropriate to hold in place the current restrictive stance of policy for longer. I am fully committed to getting inflation back to 2 percent. ConclusionI would like to conclude by saying that in this environment of heightened uncertainty, it is increasingly important to comprehend what is driving uncertainty and how monetary policy might play a role in limiting the negative impact of uncertainty on businesses, households, and financial markets. Many of you in this audience have devoted a considerable amount of time to understanding the intricate link between uncertainty and economic outcomes. Your work has enriched our collective knowledge and has been instrumental in helping us policymakers understand the complexities of our decisions. Please keep it up! Thank you. ReferencesAdam, Klaus, and Michael Woodford (2012). "Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy in a Microfounded New Keynesian Model,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 59 (July), pp. 468–87. Barlevy, Gadi (2011). "Robustness and Macroeconomic Policy,"Annual Review of Economics,vol. 3 (September), pp. 1–24. Blinder, Alan S. (1998).Central Banking in Theory and Practice.Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Brainard, William C. (1967). "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 57 (May), pp. 411–25. Bullard, James (2018). "The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002). "Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 49 (September), pp. 1105–29. Chow, Gregory (1976). "The Control of Nonlinear Econometric Systems with Unknown Parameters,"Econometrica,vol. 44 (July), pp. 685–95. Craine, Roger, and Arthur Havenner (1977). "A Stochastic Optimal Control Technique for Models with Estimated Coefficients,"Econometrica,vol. 45 (May), pp. 1013–21. Epstein, Larry G., and Martin Schneider (2003). "Recursive Multiple Priors,"Journal of Economic Theory,vol. 113 (November), pp. 1–31. Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja (2001).Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 58 (March), pp. 1–17. Hansen, Lars P., and Thomas J. Sargent (2008).Robustness.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ——— (2021). "Macroeconomic Uncertainty Prices When Beliefs Are Tenuous,"Journal of Econometrics,vol. 223 (July), pp. 222–50. Kendrick, David (1982). "Caution and Probing in a Macroeconomic Model,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 4 (November), pp. 149–70. Knight, Frank H. (1921).Risk, Uncertainty and Profit.Boston: Houghton Mifflin. McLeay, Michael, and Silvana Tenreyro (2019). "Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips Curve," in Martin S. Eichenbaum, Erik Hurst, and Jonathan A. Parker, eds.,NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2019,vol. 34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 199–255. Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, Alex, David H. Papell, and Ruxandra Prodan (2014). "Deviations from Rules-Based Policy and Their Effects,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 49 (December), pp. 4–17. Powell,Jerome H. (2018). "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24. Prescott, Edward (1972). "The Multi-Period Control Problem under Uncertainty,"Econometrica,vol. 40 (November), pp. 1043–58. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214. Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams (2010). "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3B. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 829–59. Sargent, Thomas J. (1993).Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics: The Arne Ryde Memorial Lectures.Oxford: Oxford University Press. Smith, Simon C., Allan Timmermann, and Jonathan Wright (2023). "Breaks in the Phillips Curve: Evidence from Panel Data," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-015. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Söderstrom, Ulf (2002). "Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,"Scandinavian Journal of Economics,vol. 104 (March), pp. 125–45. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2021). "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 52 (December), pp. 393–428. Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003). "What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules,"Journal of Economic Literature,vol. 41 (June), pp. 426–77. Tetlow, Robert (2019). "The Monetary Policy Response to Uncertain Inflation Persistence,"Economics Letters,vol. 175 (February), pp. 5–8. Tetlow, Robert, and Peter von zur Muehlen (2001). "Robust Monetary Policy with Misspecified Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 25 (June), pp. 911–49. ——— (2009). "Robustifying Learnability,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 33 (February), pp. 296–316. Whittle, Peter (1981). "Risk-Sensitive Linear/Quadratic/Gaussian Control,"Advances in Applied Probability,vol. 13 (December), pp. 764–77. Yellen, Janet L. (2012). "Perspectives on Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Boston Economic Club Dinner, Boston, June 6. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For example, in 1998, Alan Blinder wrote that the Brainard result was "never far from my mind when I occupied the Vice Chairman's office at the Federal Reserve. In my view . . . a little stodginess at the central bank is entirely appropriate" (Blinder, 1998, p. 12).Return to text 3. An incomplete list of the early contributions includes Prescott (1972), Chow (1976), Craine and Havenner (1977), and Kendrick (1982).Return to text 4. The estimate of 9.3 million jobs uses total nonfarm seasonally adjusted numbers from theSt. Louis Fed FRED database(PAYEMS series) and takes the difference between the December 1998 and January 1996 numbers.Return to text 5. Optimal-control policies are optimal conditional on the structure of the model to which they are applied. Provided the model is a reliable approximation of the true economy, and policymakers' preferences are correctly specified, the policy prescriptions derived from optimal-control exercises are, by definition, the best that can be achieved. However, the underlying assumptions are stringent in many applications. There is also a literature on risk-adjusted optimal control dating back at least to Whittle (1981). See Taylor and Williams (2010) and references therein for a detailed argument on the efficacy of simple rules as hedges against model misspecification. Svensson (2003) is a critique of the use of all simple monetary policy rules—sometimes referred to asinstrument rules—as opposed to what are calledtargeting rules. In a 2012 speech, then Vice Chair Janet Yellen observed, "In evaluating the stance of policy, I find the prescriptions from simple policy rules a logical starting point" (Yellen, 2012). She went on to argue that simple rules "by no means deserve the 'last word'" on guidance for monetary policy, in part because they do not fully account for factors that might be idiosyncratic, such as risk-management concerns. That speech introduced the Fed's optimal-control simulations to the public as an alternative source of guidance for monetary policy that could be used alongside that of simple monetary policy rules, together with judgment. Since 2017, theMonetary Policy Reporthas discussed simple monetary policy rules and their limitations.Return to text 6. Nikolosko-Rzhevskyy, Papell, and Prodan (2014), among others, explore this question.Return to text 7. By "learnable" I mean in the sense that least-squares learning would converge, in the limit, on rational expectations equilibrium. See Evans and Honkapohja (2001) for a textbook treatment of learning in macroeconomics. Bullard and Mitra (2002) established the benefits of inertia in monetary policy for making a wider set of models "E-stable," meaning the process of least-squares learning leads to a unique and stable equilibrium. Tetlow and von zur Muehlen (2009) broadened that conclusion to a wider set of learning rules.Return to text 8. See, for example, Stock and Watson (2021) for time-series evidence and Smith, Timmermann, and Wright (2023) for panel data results.Return to text 9. See, for example, Bullard (2018) for a demonstration and McLeay and Tenreyo (2019) for a detailed argument along these lines.Return to text 10. The literature on robust control in economics (for example, Hansen and Sargent, 2008) began with the normative case of how policymakers might address their doubts. The literature on ambiguity aversion (for example, Epstein and Schneider, 2003) had agents within models confront their doubts in making decisions. Works at the intersection of these two strands of the literature expand the concept of uncertainty (in the sense of Knight, 1921) in a micro-founded manner and relax the rational expectations hypothesis in a disciplined way. See, for example, Hansen and Sargent (2021).Return to text 11. See Barlevy (2011) for an accessible survey and Tetlow and von zur Muehlen (2001) for a more technical treatment.Return to text 12. Söderstöm (2002) establishes the result for the Bayesian case. Tetlow (2019) is a simple demonstration of that case alongside an ambiguity aversion case. With uncertain inflation persistence, the Bayesian and ambiguity aversion approaches lead to a policy that is stronger than the certainty equivalent case because a symmetric distribution for inflation persistence results in asymmetric (downward-skewed) distributions for economic outcomes when evaluated for the certainty equivalent policy. Adam and Woodford (2012) show that uncertainty regarding the data generating process for inflation in the New Keynesian model retains as the optimal policy the same general form as in the standard model but with a more aggressive response to inflation.Return to text 13. See paragraphs 2 and 4 of the September 2007 FOMC statement, which is available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 14. See paragraph 4 of the June 2008 FOMC statement, which, in explaining the FOMC's decision to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 2 percent at that meeting, noted, "Although downside risks to growth remain, they appear to have diminished somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations have increased." See also the minutes of the June 24–25, 2008, FOMC Meeting, in particular the summary of the Committee's discussion on downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation on pages 7 and 8. Both documents are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 15. The literature on the implications of the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates for the conduct on monetary policy is large and includes Reifschneider and Williams (2000).Return to text 16. See Powell (2018).Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At Women in Economics Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Thank you, President Musalem, and many congratulations on the start of your new position here at the St. Louis Fed. We are all so happy to have you as part of the Federal Reserve System, and I am grateful for the opportunity to speak here today.1 I will start with the issue that has brought us here—why it is so important for women to be a full and equitably represented part of the economics profession. There are, of course, moral reasons for economics to reflect the values of our democratic society—it is the right thing to do. But there are eminently practical reasons as well. Economics favors the productive utilization of resources, and bringing more women into the profession obviously makes better use of the talents and efforts of more than half of the population. Greater diversity in a workforce yields better ideas and greater productivity, and the field of economics has certainly been enriched by these contributions. But today, I would like to focus on the benefits of greater representation of women that accrue to economic research and policymaking—the way that you can make economic analysis more constructive and relevant. In a broad sense, different experiences and perspectives among those engaged in any social science should provide better insights about how people think and act. But I would like to take this point a step further and connect this issue of representation to the ways in which we approach economic research. In particular, I will describe how my own personal experience has been an important tool for me to use, in combination with the more familiar and rigorous tools of the economist, in ways that I believe have strengthened my research. In doing so, I also hope to show that personal experience can be used by you and others in our profession to provide deeper insights about the questions we grapple with. If this is true, it would constitute another way in which greater representation of women—and others with underrepresented backgrounds—will increase and enhance the valuable contributions that economics makes to society. In my discussion, I will refer to some of my own past research to illustrate my general approach to economics. Importantly, though, my comments today are only illustrative of a general approach and are not commentary on any specific policy questions. In explaining how I let personal experience and rigorous economic methodology inform each other, I am going to employ, in a somewhat casual way, two words that you may be familiar with. I think of a "deductive" approach as beginning with or relying on theory or general observations and then using data or qualitative evidence to verify those ideas in specific settings. For me, an "inductive" approach means beginning with personal experience and specific evidence from a particular context and then moving to more general lessons that we can draw on as economists about given issues or topics. In my career, I have found it fruitful to employ both of these approaches at different times, and often in succession or in alternation, to move from the specific to the general, developing a theory and then sometimes using specifics to test that theory. Let me start with a little personal background, since that helped form my approach to research. I was born in the U.S. but grew up in Colombia. While there, my parents and I traveled around the country, where I observed a broad range of social problems: poverty, homelessness, child labor, and a lack of access to health care and other basic necessities. As a child, when you see suffering to this extent, you wonder about why and how it is occurring. Later, as an undergraduate, I found that economics offered tools that could help society understand and, I hoped, address some of these problems. What I started to see, and then saw more over time, was that in many ways the different social problems I observed were closely related to the opportunities people have to work and earn an income that reflects their effort and productivity as workers—in short, issues at the heart of labor economics. It also turned out that the tools of economics—for example, math and statistical analysis—were well suited to studying these questions and helped ground my work in objective reality. So I developed these skills by pursuing a Ph.D. in economics. During my career, I have conducted research on a range of topics, including labor markets, productivity, and social safety nets. And, as I will show, I have employed both the inductive and the deductive approaches that I have described here to formulate economic questions, rigorously examine data and evidence, and then test my conclusions. The first example I want to share with you is a paper I wrote with Scott Imberman and Bruce Sacerdote on the relocation of families displaced by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.2In 2005, I was a professor of economics at the University of Houston, in a city that was a major destination for people forced to evacuate from New Orleans and the surrounding area because of the hurricanes that year. Of the million people displaced by the hurricanes in 2005, Houston received 75,000 evacuees, many of them school-age children. Houston was a fast-growing city with schools that already faced challenges, so people had questions about what effect this influx of new students might have on our local schools—now stretched for resources—and the students already attending them. It mattered to me as a member of the community with my own children attending those schools. Fortunately, economics provided tools to explore this question. The question we considered was about "peer effects"—does the performance of your peers affect your own performance in school? How will students coming from other schools affect the outcomes for those already in Houston? The research literature showed some evidence of an effect, but the results were mixed. It is easy to imagine some reasons why peers could matter. A key challenge was that, even if we could find a relationship between the outcomes of the existing Houston students and their peers from Louisiana, that would not prove that the new students "caused" the outcomes of the existing Houston students. Classmates in the same classes with similar backgrounds could have similar outcomes for lots of reasons. But in this case, these new peers did not choose to attend certain schools based on pre-existing trends but instead were assigned to schools based on their shelter location, which is basically a random assignment—highly conducive to estimating causal effects. And the magnitude of this particular event was large enough to provide lots of variation in the composition of peers. I consider the approach we took to designing this study a good example of the power of deductive reasoning—developing a hypothesis and then finding the data by which to test it. But we didn't just think about the data we started with. We had lots of discussions with school administrators and teachers. What they had to say about their experiences led us to explore ways in which the new students were affecting the existing ones, beyond grades and test scores—for example, behavior in schools and absenteeism. As any parent of school-age kids can tell you, these are obvious and significant factors in how students learn, and these discussions resonated for me as a parent with kids in school. My co-authors and I knew we had to make this part of our research. Our basic approach in this paper was to relate changes in student outcomes with the prevalence of evacuee children in their district, controlling for a rich set of factors. Our conclusions were that in Houston, a large influx of evacuees did not generally have a large effect on test performance of local students. We did detect some negative effects in some subgroups, particularly in math. Motivated by discussions with teachers and administrators, we also found some small negative effects on attendance and behavior. Using traditional methods in economics, we conducted a number of what economists call "robustness checks," making sure that our assumption that the relocating families weren't picking school districts based on pre-existing trends held up, trying different ways of measuring outcomes or specifying models, and attempting to exclude alternative explanations, such as changes in teacher quality or educational resources. Using these familiar methods, we had found that Houston schools were able to absorb the new students with little aggregate effect on local students. But that finding sent us back to think about the theories we had developed at the start of the project and the different reasons that make peers relevant to a student. In a sense, now that we had some results, what had started as a deductive analysis turned into an inductive one. And by examining the data more thoroughly, we discovered that a crucial factor in determining the impact of peers on academic outcomes was the extent to which students are grouped and interact with classmates of a similar academic ability level. Adding this dimension to our research, we found that peer effects were, in fact, stronger among cohorts of students with similar academic ability. It is a nuance to our overall finding of little significant effect and a result that I suspect would not have been attainable without the personal experience that I brought to the project as a parent—one of the factors that had motivated the work in the first place. Let me offer a second example of this "inductive" approach, based on personal experience, and the interaction with a "deductive" approach that resulted in research that I am particularly proud of. As I said earlier, I taught at the University of Houston, a great school that has a very diverse student body, with people from all walks of life and at different stages of their lives. There were a lot of commuters, many still living at home with parents. There were also a lot of actual parents in my classes and people who had to work full-time jobs while completing their education. I once had a student who needed to reschedule a final exam because she had to go to court to fight for custody of her child. I had students who struggled to secure childcare to attend class, others who struggled with access to transportation to and from campus. The hurdles they often had to overcome were daunting. And while many obtained loans and other tuition assistance, the challenges they faced were multidimensional, and I often found myself thinking that their education would be much more successful if they had support in other areas of their lives. I had written two papers on a training program in Colombia that included a stipend for workers.3The stipend was intended to subsidize transportation for workers, with an extra amount for women that was intended to supplement their costs for childcare. The results found a significant boost to wages and employment from the training program, especially for women, and we found that the gains stayed with those workers for over a decade after the program. Moreover, we also found that the program encouraged workers and even their relatives to pursue more formal schooling—high school and even college. But these papers didn't allow me to explore the separate contribution of the stipend to the wage, employment, and educational gains we found. My own experience with students at the University of Houston suggested that this more comprehensive support for the workers in training was important, so I decided to follow up on my research. So I wrote another paper—jointly with Felipe Barrera-Osorio and Mikko Silliman—based on an experiment we conducted in collaboration with a training program.4In this experiment, we randomly offered stipends to some but not all workers. Students might use the stipend to pay for transportation to and from the program, or perhaps to help cover meals during the program, depending on what they saw as their most pressing needs. I like to call this a form of "wraparound" support; the stipend wraps around the main program to make it easier for people to participate. Some workers accepted to the training program were put in a class that focused on technical skills, and others in a class emphasizing social skills—again using random assignment. We found that participants saw an increase in employment, hours worked, and wages relative to workers who did not take the program, and the effects were greatest for women. Labor market outcomes improved more for those who received technical skills training, though this difference diminished after less than a year. And, lastly, we found that the effects of the program were indeed magnified by the stipend program. The "wraparound" support enhanced the value of the training program and likely helped mitigate the other labor market challenges faced by participants. This paper again shows how insights gained from personal experience, combined with the deductive methods and tools of economics, can be the basis for good research. As I suspected from my experience with my University of Houston students, providing education is more effective, and the returns are higher, when students have some "wraparound" support that makes their lives a bit easier. We took this inductive approach and demonstrated it using standard tools of economics—randomization in a carefully designed experiment. And this approach continued in my past work as a policymaker. At the U.S. Department of Labor and at the World Bank, I confronted questions that resonated for me with experiences I had had and earlier applied in my work as a researcher. At the Labor Department, I worked on workforce development issues, and we were able to include access to more comprehensive "wraparound" services to promote strong take-up and retention in these programs. When I was advocating for this approach, I thought about my students in Houston and those workers in Colombia, all of them trying to overcome big challenges and build a better life. And I was grateful then, and I'm grateful now, for my personal experiences, which didn't come from a textbook or a lecture but helped open my eyes to the answers to some of the important questions that economics strives to answer. The research and policy work I have just described predate my time as a member of the Federal Reserve Board, and the policies I studied then are outside the purview of my current role. But I continue to apply the general approach of bringing my own experience, and the experiences I hear from others, together with the rigorous tools of economics. I listen to people from a range of communities and backgrounds to better understand the economic data and the statistical analysis we perform while working to make monetary policy decisions within the framework assigned to us by Congress that benefit all Americans. So I will close my remarks by urging all of you to find ways to bring your unique experiences into your work in economics. I am a woman, a Latina, an immigrant, and a mother. As a person with this particular background, I have found that I have a unique perspective I can bring to the economics profession. By all means, build the technical skills you will need to prove your ideas; that is, indeed, critical in the economics profession. But don't be afraid to bring up your own perspective, based on your own experiences, when discussing economic issues. I think this is especially important for women, whose perspectives are still underrepresented in the profession. Whether you decide to pursue a path in economics focused on research, policy, business, or some combination of these, you will make the greatest contribution by becoming a true expert on the issues you work on. You will accomplish this by refining your technical skills and, importantly, by bringing your unique perspective to each problem you seek to solve. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Scott A. Imberman, Adriana D. Kugler, and Bruce I. Sacerdote (2012), "Katrina's Children: Evidence on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees,"American Economic Review,vol. 102 (August), pp. 2048–82.Return to text 3. See Adriana Kugler, Orazio Attanasio, and Costas Meghir (2011), "Subsidizing Vocational Training for Disadvantaged Youth in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Trial,"American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,vol. 3 (July), pp.188–220; and Adriana Kugler, Maurice Kugler, Juan E. Saavedra, and Luis Omar Herrera-Prada (2022), "Long-Term Educational Consequences of Vocational Training in Colombia,"Journal of Human Resources,vol. 57 (January), pp. 178–216.Return to text 4. Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Adriana Kugler, and Mikko Silliman (2023), "Hard and Soft Skills in Vocational Training: Experimental Evidence from Colombia,"World Bank Economic Review,vol. 37 (August), pp. 409–36.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board announced on Monday that it is accepting applications from individuals who wish to be considered for membership on the Community Advisory Council (CAC). The CAC was formed in 2015. It advises the Board on issues affecting consumers and communities and complements two of the Board's other advisory councils whose members represent depository institutions--the Federal Advisory Council and the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council. The CAC is made up of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer and community development organizations and interests, including affordable housing, community and workforce development, small business, and asset and wealth building. CAC members meet semiannually with members of the Board of Governors in Washington to provide a range of perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income consumers and communities. The Board expects to announce the appointment of CAC members in the fall of 2024. Applicants from previous years are encouraged to re-apply in 2024. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions for submitting an application, can be found in the attachedFederal RegisterNotice. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Solicitation of Applications for Membership on the Community Advisory Council
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Provident Financial Services, Inc., of Jersey City, New Jersey, to merge with Lakeland Bancorp, Inc., of Oak Ridge, New Jersey, and thereby indirectly acquire its subsidiary bank, Lakeland Bank, of Newfoundland, New Jersey. Attached is the Board's order relating to this action. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced it will extend through May 31, 2024, the public comment period for the application by Capital One Financial Corporation of McLean, Virginia, to acquire Discover Financial Services of Riverwoods, Illinois. The comment period is being extended to provide additional time for interested parties to comment on the proposal. The application was filed on March 21, 2024, and comments on the application were originally due by April 26, 2024. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Capital One-Discover Application and related materials
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Mode Eleven Bancorp, Hulett, WyomingCease and Desist Order dated March 28, 2024 Steele Bancshares, Inc., Tyler, Texas and American State Bank, Arp, TexasWritten Agreement dated March 29, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 Attachment 2
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the Samuel DuBois Cook Center Career Achievement Awards Ceremony, the University Club, Washington, D.C. Thank you, Dr. Darity, for your kind introduction. I am profoundly moved to be surrounded by family and friends, and it gives me another opportunity to tell all of you that I would not be where I am today without your support. I include in that circle my fellow award recipients today, Drs. Cecilia Rouse and Peter Blair Henry. I am beyond humbled and honored to receive this career achievement award from The Samuel DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity at Duke University, and I am inspired by what it represents. Of course, to me, Samuel DuBois Cook was simply "Uncle Sam." My Uncle Sam was a Korean War veteran, a political theorist, an activist, and the first African American tenured professor at Duke and any major southern university. He then went on to become president of Dillard University . . . the list goes on and on. Now that was a lifetime of achievement. At Morehouse College, Uncle Sam was a classmate of a young man named Martin Luther King, Jr. Before that, they picked tobacco together during the summer to earn the money they needed for their studies. Uncle Sam led the campus chapter of the NAACP at Morehouse and went on to become student body president (twice) and valedictorian. Along with my mother Mary Murray Cook, his brother and my dad Rev. Payton Brailsford Cook, my cousin and civil rights leader Floyd McKissick, Sr., and a host of other relatives, he instilled in me the deep belief of the Civil Rights Movement that with faith, preparation, and great effort, things could and would be better. When I was beaten and suffered verbal assaults while desegregating my schools in Georgia, I drew strength from the example set by my uncle, my aunts, my parents, and by Dr. King and their conviction that there is great hope and promise in the world. It was—and remains—the duty of everyone in and who embraced and was inspired by the Civil Rights Movement to make good on that hope and promise and to build a better future. I mentioned great effort. That was always paramount for my Uncle Sam.The New York Timesquoted his advice: "Have a vision—a dream of success—and work like hell." Uncle Sam believed people need guides, role models, and taskmasters to take advantage of the greater opportunities he helped to make possible. We call those guides, role models, and taskmasters "mentors" for short. I found many mentors along my academic journey, and I would like to give special thanks to those I met through the Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics, which Sandy Darity started at Duke in 2008. The Initiative is a research mentoring workshop that pairs junior faculty with mentors who can help them navigate the path to tenure. It has seen 53 Initiative fellows being promoted and tenured at institutions of higher learning. I am grateful to all the mentors who took my ideas seriously, including Art Goldsmith who was a DITE mentor, helped me sharpen the hypotheses that emerged from them, and pressed me to think hard about the best data and methods to test these hypotheses. Graduate and undergraduate students from many backgrounds ask me how to find mentors that share their background. I tell them they will need more than one mentor and to seek out mentors who have different backgrounds and expertise such that they will be exposed to a wide range of views and experiences. For just one paper on violence and patents, I had several mentors, among them George Akerlof, Ken Arrow, Sandy Darity, Barry Eichengreen, Milton Friedman, Alan Krueger, Paul Romer, and Jeff Wooldridge. Most importantly, make sure your mentors challenge you and hold you accountable. And when the time comes, it is incumbent on you—on all of us, really—to become a mentor. That is what Uncle Sam did. That is one reason I was grateful to lead the American Economic Association's Summer Program, to receive the AEA Mentoring Program's Impactful Mentor award for working with graduate students, and to participate in and support other initiatives to train young economists. Mentors help convert hope and promise into action, enabling those who come after us to build a better future. As I learned from Uncle Sam, there is no higher calling. In closing, let me express my hope that accepting this career achievement award does not mean I am officially retired. But more seriously, I am very grateful to be recognized and in the company of colleagues who have stood by me and fought with me to improve our field. I accept this award in the spirit of challenge it represents. I am forever mindful of Samuel DuBois Cook's belief that there is much work ahead of us as we seek to build a world that is more just and offers more opportunity for all. Although this may be called a career achievement award, I accept it with the conviction that I am just getting started.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on February 20 and March 20, 2024. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on March 19–20, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955 Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeMarch 19–20, 2024:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2024 New York Fed Regional and Community Banking Conference, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good morning, it is really a pleasure to join you by video. I would like to thank Supervision at the New York Fed for inviting me to join you at this year's Regional and Community Banking Conference. These forums enable us to continue our engagement with bankers in the industry to address a variety of issues and challenges that exist in the current banking environment. Some of the topics that will be covered today include contingency funding, operational readiness, market uncertainties, and banking innovations. I appreciate that you have joined us to discuss these and several other topics on our agenda. Before we get started, I would like to highlight a few areas of concern and identify some changed supervisory expectations that may provide a useful backdrop for the discussions. The Banking Landscape and Risks TodayOver the past few years, we have experienced a number of challenges around the world and in the U.S. that have reverberated throughout the economy and have required banks to confront and mitigate the associated risks—including the pandemic, a sharp rise in inflation with an associated rapid rise in interest rates, CRE market uncertainties due to changing work and business preferences, increased third-party fintech engagement in the banking industry, and the 2023 bank failures. Today, we find ourselves at an inflection point in banking and financial services. Some traditional risks—like liquidity risk and interest rate risk—have become a higher priority concern for banks and regulators, while other risks—like third-party risk and cybersecurity risk—continue to evolve and pose new challenges. Bankers and regulators alike must consider how our reactions to these issues will impact the future of the banking system, and how safety and soundness, consumer protection, U.S. financial stability, and the ongoing and future role of banks within the U.S. financial system will be affected. Banks must ensure their risk-management frameworks appropriately identify, measure, monitor, and control for both existing and emerging risks. They must continue to innovate responsibly and ensure their risk-management frameworks account for novel product offerings both prior to implementation and as the service and customer engagement evolves. Regulators must consider the many tradeoffs in their approach to supervision and regulation to most effectively support banks as they embark upon and continue on this journey. In their quest to be agile by offering new services and responding to new and evolving risks, banks must have access to and understand the rules of the road. Similarly, supervisors must be knowledgeable in how to appropriately identify, supervise, and regulate emerging risks. Regulators must encourage and support responsible innovation as banks expand their product offerings to serve the needs of their customers and communities. Risk Management and Contingency FundingShifting to contingency funding plans, given the expanding number of challenges and shocks that the economy has faced over the past few years, it is prudent for banks not only to continue to evolve and update emergency planning activities in light of these risks, but also to test their emergency plans. Since the banking stress and bank failures last spring, these risks have led to heightened liquidity risks for some firms. I understand that supervisors at the New York Fed and across the Federal Reserve System have engaged with state member banks and holding companies about appropriate risk management and have indicated that those plans should include emergency borrowing from the discount window if a bank's condition warrants a need for emergency liquidity. Last year, the Federal Reserve Board issued updated guidance noting that depository institutions should regularly evaluate and update their contingency funding plans.1 All banks should have emergency contingency funding plans in place. Liquidity planning must include access to funding sources that can be utilized when they are most needed, which may include borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Banks or from the discount window. However, as I've noted previously, while it may be appropriate for supervisors to encourage banks to establish and maintain contingency funding sources, test the contingency funding plans, and evaluate whether those plans are adequate in the context of examination, supervisors are not bankers. And we must be cautious not to cross the line from supervisor to member of the management team and avoid interfering with the decisionmaking of bank management. We must also ensure that liquidity requirements and supervisory expectations are commensurate with the bank's size, complexity, and risk profile. Supervisory ChangesRegulators have an important role to play in ensuring the safety and soundness of the banking system in light of evolving risks. These risks can be exacerbated by shortcomings in bank supervision, as we saw last spring. These bank failures and the events and circumstances surrounding them warrant review, self-reflection, and where necessary, appropriately targeted changes to identified gaps in regulation and supervision. We should carefully examine what is working and what can be improved in bank supervision. In doing so, we must appropriately and effectively manage our supervisory programs, teams, and expectations to ensure that efficient, effective, and consistent supervision is implemented across our regulated entities according to a bank's complexity, size, risk profile, and scope of activities. Conducting supervision in a manner that respects due process and provides transparency around supervisory expectations goes a long way in accomplishing these goals. We should acknowledge that changes to supervisory expectations and processes, coupled with the sheer volume of recent regulatory and supervisory reforms and proposed reforms, will undoubtedly present additional challenges and risks for banks. While some changes to the supervisory process and priorities may be appropriate to promote a safe and sound financial system and enhance financial stability, having an appropriate focus on the most salient risks is important for effective risk management and effective supervision. We should be cautious that these changes do not distract banks or supervisors from focusing on core and emerging risks or impair the long-term viability of the banking system—especially for mid-sized and smaller banks. In closing, I hope that today's conference provides an opportunity for open and frank conversations about prudent risk management and how we can work together to maintain a safe and sound financial system. Thank you for taking the time to be with us today. I hope you enjoy the conference, and I look forward to spending more time discussing these issues with you in the future. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Update Guidance on Liquidity Risks and Contingency Planning," news release, July 28, 2023.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Stanford Business, Government, and Society Forum, Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California It is a pleasure to be here today. I will begin with the economy and the road ahead for monetary policy before briefly discussing the Federal Reserve's monetary policy independence. Over the past year, inflation has come down significantly but is still running above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent goal. In February, headline inflation was 2.5 percent over the past 12 months based on the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) index. A year earlier, it was 5.2 percent. Core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components, stood at 2.8 percent; a year ago, it was 4.8 percent. While this progress is welcome, the job of sustainably restoring 2 percent inflation is not yet done. Tight monetary policy continues to weigh on demand, particularly in interest-sensitive spending categories.Nonetheless, growth in economic activity and employment was strong in 2023, as real gross domestic product expanded more than 3 percent and 3 million jobs were created, even as inflation fell substantially. This combination of outcomes reflects significant improvements in supply that offset to some extent the effects on demand of tighter financial conditions. The healing of global supply chains helped address pent-up demand for goods, particularly in sectors that had faced considerable shortages, such as autos. In addition, labor supply increased significantly, thanks to rising participation among 25-to-54-year-olds, as well as a strong pace of immigration. Recent readings on both job gains and inflation have come in higher than expected. The economy added an average of 265,000 jobs per month in the three months through February, a faster pace than we have seen since last June. And the higher inflation data over January and February were above the low readings in the second half of last year. The recent data do not, however, materially change the overall picture, which continues to be one of solid growth, a strong but rebalancing labor market, and inflation moving down toward 2 percent on a sometimes bumpy path. Labor market rebalancing is evident in data on quits, job openings, surveys of employers and workers, and the continued gradual decline in wage growth. On inflation, it is too soon to say whether the recent readings represent more than just a bump. We do not expect that it will be appropriate to lower our policy rate until we have greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably down toward 2 percent. Given the strength of the economy and progress on inflation so far, we have time to let the incoming data guide our decisions on policy. We have held our policy rate at its current level since last July. As shown in the individual projections the FOMC released two weeks ago, my colleagues and I continue to believe that the policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle. If the economy evolves broadly as we expect, most FOMC participants see it as likely to be appropriate to begin lowering the policy rate at some point this year. Of course, the outlook is still quite uncertain, and we face risks on both sides. Reducing rates too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress we have seen on inflation and ultimately require even tighter policy to get inflation back to 2 percent. But easing policy too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. As progress on inflation continues and labor market tightness eases, these risks continue to move into better balance. As conditions evolve, monetary policy is well positioned to confront either of these risks. We are making decisions meeting by meeting, and we will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. That brings me to my second topic. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. Our success in delivering on these goals matters a great deal to all Americans. To support our pursuit of those goals, Congress granted the Fed a substantial degree of independence in our conduct of monetary policy. Fed policymakers serve long terms that are not synchronized with election cycles. Our decisions are not subject to reversal by other parts of the government, other than through legislation. This independence both enables and requires us to make our monetary policy decisions without consideration of short-term political matters. Such independence for a federal agency is and should be rare. In the case of the Fed, independence is essential to our ability to serve the public. The record shows that independent central banks deliver better economic outcomes.1 We recognize that we need to continually earn this grant of independence, and we do so by carrying out our work with technical competence and objectivity, in a transparent and accountable manner, and by sticking to our knitting. By technical competence, I mean that Fed policymakers use the most up-to-date information and research to deepen our understanding of the ever-evolving economy and to reliably deliver on our assigned goals. We are supported by a highly capable staff. We also draw on the insights and experiences of a wide array of business, academic, community, and labor leaders, as well as others engaged in the economy. And by objective, I mean that our analysis is free from any personal or political bias, in service to the public. We will not always get it right—no one does. But our decisions will always reflect our painstaking assessment of what is best for our economy in the medium and longer term—and nothing else. Transparency and accountability are fundamental for any government agency in a democracy but are especially important for one granted policy independence. The Fed has a special obligation to explain ourselves clearly—to describe what we are doing and why we are doing it. We are always striving to improve on this communication, and it is a job that is never complete. But we have come a long way. Before 1994, the FOMC did not even announce our monetary policy decisions. Today we announce those decisions and explain the thinking behind them in our post meeting statement and press conference. We publish detailed minutes of our deliberations and a quarterly summary of the economic and policy projections of each FOMC participant. We publish a monetary policy report twice a year, and the Chair appears before Congress to present that report and answer any and all questions that are on the minds of our oversight committee members. In 2020, we completed a yearlong public review of our monetary policy framework, and late this year, we will begin another such review.2My colleagues and I explain our views on the economic outlook and monetary policy in speeches like this one, and in visits to communities across the country, as part of extensive outreach in which we seek input from individuals and groups throughout society. Transparency is an affirmative and proactive commitment to the public. To maintain the public's trust, we also need to avoid "mission creep." Our nation faces many challenges, some of which directly or indirectly involve the economy. Fed policymakers are often pressed to take a position on issues that are arguably relevant to the economy but are not within our mandate, such as particular tax and spending policies, immigration policy, and trade policy. Climate change is another current example. Policies to address climate change are the business of elected officials and those agencies that they have charged with this responsibility. The Fed has received no such charge. We do, however, have a narrow role that relates to our responsibilities as a bank supervisor. The public will expect that the institutions we regulate and supervise will understand and be able to manage the material risks that they face, which, over time, are likely to include climate-related financial risks. We will remain alert to the risk that there will be pressure to expand that role over time. We are not, nor do we seek to be, climate policymakers. In short, doing our job well requires that we respect the limits of our mandate. Thank you. I look forward to our discussion. 1. See, for example, Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 25 (May), pp. 151–62; Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2007), "The Evolution of Central Bank Governance around the World,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 21 (Fall), pp. 69–90; Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2008), "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"European Journal of Political Economy,vol. 24 (December), pp. 763–77; and N. Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen (2014), "Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates and New Measures,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 10 (March), pp. 189–253.Return to text 2. We expect to release the results of this review about a year after it begins.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At “Frameworks for Monetary Policy, Regulation, and Bank Capital” Spring 2024 Meeting of the Shadow Open Market Committee, hosted by the Manhattan Institute, New York, New York Thank you for the invitation to speak to the Shadow Open Market Committee (SOMC).1The SOMC has a distinguished reputation for fostering substantive analysis and debate regarding independent, transparent, and systematic approaches to central bank policymaking. It's a pleasure to join you today and to discuss some of the current issues facing central banks and monetary policymakers. In my remarks today, I will review some of the notable developments in the U.S. economy and financial system—as well as review key monetary policy actions and communications—since I joined the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and became a permanent voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in late November 2018. As I look back over these five-plus years, I will consider how a range of uncertainties and risks regarding the macroeconomy and its measurement have affected monetary policy decisions and communications. I will also highlight some considerations regarding financial stability risks and monetary policy. I will conclude with my own views on the near-term economic outlook, some of the prominent risks and uncertainties surrounding my outlook, and my views on the implications for monetary policy. Setting Monetary Policy amid a Wide Range of Uncertainties and RisksAn omni-present challenge monetary policymakers face is how to account for uncertainties surrounding the current state of the economy and the economic outlook when setting monetary policy. Macroeconomic models that can help guide the setting of monetary policy often invoke unobservable concepts such as the natural rate of unemployment, potential output, or the neutral real interest rate. These unobservable concepts can be estimated but only with a considerable degree of uncertainty, and the estimates may vary over time—for example, because of structural changes in the economy. Macroeconomic models are also subject to uncertainty, since they must make simplifying assumptions regarding the complex set of relationships and interactions among households, businesses, governments, and the financial system that also evolve and change. Moreover, the data that are used to estimate model parameters and to formulate the economic outlook are inherently uncertain and are often revised as the statistical agencies refine their estimates or gather more information. In addition to uncertainties surrounding macroeconomic models and measurement, there are a number of risks that, if realized, could shock the economy and financial system, making it more difficult for policymakers to confidently assess the economy and the economic outlook. Despite these challenges, monetary policymaking requires a forward-looking approach, since its actions affect the economy, labor markets, and inflation with a lag.2 The post–financial crisis economy and monetary policy at the zero lower boundWhen I joined the FOMC in late 2018, despite nearly a decade of accommodative monetary policy following the financial crisis and subsequent recession, one of the primary concerns was that inflation had persistently been running slightly below the Committee's 2 percent inflation target. There was a recognition that the "natural rate of unemployment" may have been lower than many on the FOMC had estimated, and that inflation may have become less responsive to reductions in the unemployment rate.3This recognition meant that preemptive increases in the federal funds rate based on expected reductions in the unemployment rate alone may not have been needed to keep inflation and inflation expectations aligned with the Committee's 2 percent target. A central topic of FOMC meeting discussions throughout 2019 was how monetary policy strategies and tools could best achieve the Committee's dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment when structurally low interest rates and disinflationary forces kept inflation persistently under the Committee's inflation target. There was also a concern that the federal funds rate, the FOMC's key policy rate, was too close to the "zero lower bound." And that this proximity could limit the Committee's ability to respond effectively to an adverse shock by using our primary monetary policy tool of lowering the target range for the federal funds rate. More broadly, many central banks around the world were grappling with the prospect of structurally lower interest rates due to a variety of factors, including demographic changes and higher savings rates, lower potential output and productivity growth, and greater investor demand for safe assets like Treasury securities. At the time, the FOMC assessed that downward risks to both employment and inflation were likely to remain prominent due to the proximity of interest rates to the zero lower bound. In August 2020, the FOMC significantly revised its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy to reflect this assessment.4A notable change relative to the initial statement adopted in 2012 was a change in the language addressing how the FOMC would conduct monetary policy. The new statement noted that the Committee would seek "to mitigateshortfalls[emphasis added]"—rather than "deviations"—"of employment from the Committee's assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal."5By replacing the word "deviations" with "shortfalls" when describing employment and the Committee's reaction to changes in employment relative to estimates of its maximum level, the Committee indicated that it would not act preemptively to curb inflation based only on the perception of labor market tightness. Another notable change to the strategy statement was the adoption of what some refer to as "asymmetric flexible average inflation targeting" or "temporary price level targeting."6Specifically, the new statement noted that "in order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at [its 2 percent goal], the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time."7 The revisions to the FOMC's statement focused on monetary policy in a world of structurally low interest rates, disinflationary forces, and an apparent insensitivity of inflation to low levels of unemployment. Although the revised statement reaffirmed the commitment to the Committee's inflation target, it did not describe how the Committee would respond if inflation were to run persistentlyaboveits 2 percent goal.8 Given the timing of its implementation, the revised strategy guided how the FOMC responded to one of the largest shocks experienced by the U.S. economy in recent years—the COVID-19 pandemic. This shock—combined with the policy responses of governments and central banks around the world—disrupted many of the dynamics that had influenced the economy over the previous several decades and the post–2008 financial crisis approach to monetary policy. These impacts will affect how we think about monetary policy going forward, but let's first put the COVID-19 event and response into better context. The COVID-19 shock and monetary policy responseToward the latter part of the FOMC's monetary policy framework review, in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic created an unprecedented shock to the global economy and financial system. Widespread economic lockdowns and social distancing, combined with other pandemic effects, caused the swiftest and deepest contraction in employment and economic activity since the Great Depression. Many critical parts of the U.S. financial system experienced significant disruption or completely ceased to function. The Federal Reserve responded forcefully to mitigate the financial market turmoil and the economic effects of the rapid shutdown of the U.S. economy (and I'll have more to say on this topic later). As a part of its response, the FOMC quickly lowered the target range for the federal funds rate back to 0 to 1/4 percent and began purchasing large amounts of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities. These purchases were initially designed to support the smooth functioning of securities markets and the flow of credit to businesses and households. Later, the purchases provided additional monetary policy accommodation to support economic activity and labor markets.9 Following the return to the zero lower bound, in addition to conducting asset purchases, the FOMC used forward guidance to provide additional monetary policy accommodation to keep both short- and longer-term interest rates low. In its March 15, 2020, statement, the FOMC noted that it expected to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent "until it [was] confident that the economy [had] weathered recent events and [was] on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals."10Following the release of the revised framework in August 2020, the FOMC revised the forward guidance in its September post-meeting statement to be more explicitly outcome-based to state that the target range would remain at 0 to 1/4 percent "until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time."11In its December 2020 post-meeting statement, the FOMC added forward guidance regarding its asset purchases by noting that it expected that the current pace of asset purchases would continue until "substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee's maximum employment and price stability goals."12 This explicit outcome-based forward guidance, like the revised monetary policy framework, was very focused on supporting the economy following the COVID-19 shock amid the risks of persistently low inflation and disinflationary forces with structurally low interest rates. The guidance was also quite restrictive in the criteria for slowing the pace of asset purchases, especially since the FOMC would stop asset purchases before it would raise the federal funds rate.13 One could argue the December forward guidance made it much more difficult for the FOMC to react to new information suggesting that risks and uncertainties had evolved in response to pandemic-related changes in the economy. Other uncertainties such as the accuracy of real-time economic measurements also presented challenges, as did significant supply-side disruptions and the uncertainty about the timing of progress toward their resolution, which I will discuss next. The post-pandemic economy, the resurgence of inflation, and the rapid tightening in monetary policyIn the early phases of the pandemic, fiscal authorities around the world implemented support programs for labor markets and households and businesses.14These generous policies, combined with very accommodative monetary policies, bolstered private-sector and state and local government balance sheets. In particular, they led to what has come to be known as "excess savings"—above-normal household savings from extraordinary levels of fiscal support and a limited ability to freely spend it due to economic lockdowns, supply chain disruptions, and other pandemic- and recession-related factors. In 2021, novel medical treatments, reduced social distancing, and innovative business approaches in adapting to the restrictive pandemic environment led to a sharp economic rebound. Strong demand (supported by stimulative fiscal and monetary policies), a reduced labor supply (due in part to early retirements, childcare responsibilities, and concerns about COVID-19), and a mismatch between available jobs and workers all contributed to a very tight labor market. The unusually rapid rebound in economic activity, pandemic-driven shift to consumer goods spending, supply chain fragilities, and manufacturing component shortages led to crippling bottlenecks for a number of industries. These supply and demand imbalances, likely amplified by fiscal and monetary policies, led to a sharp rise in inflation over a period of just a few months. By the second half of 2021, inflationary pressures intensified and became more broad- based. Labor markets were extremely tight, though it was difficult to assess the true extent of tightness, given the decrease in labor force participation and mixed data signals at the time, which all were later revised. Of the many difficult issues the Committee faced, one of the most important was whether inflation would persist or would resolve as supply-side issues eventually eased. The September 2021 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) showed the median FOMC expectation for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation of 4.2 percent at the end of 2021, largely reflecting high inflation readings in the first half of 2021. But for year-end 2022, the median expectation was for PCE inflation to decline to 2.2 percent.15Private-sector forecasters expected higher inflation of 5.1 percent at year-end 2021 but also projected a slowing to just over 2 percent by the end of 2022.16With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that most forecasters, ourselves included, vastly misjudged the persistence of inflation at that time, with 5.9 percent PCE inflation for both 2021 and 2022. This example underscores the challenge we faced in identifying which factors were driving inflation and how long those forces would persist. In the second half of 2021, it became clear that the FOMC's monetary policy stance was too accommodative in the presence of growing inflationary pressures and that the Committee needed to move toward a tighter policy stance. It seems likely to me that the experience of the years leading up to the pandemic, when inflation was persistently low, made it hard for many to foresee how quickly that situation could change. Of course, the inflation and labor data did not accurately reflect the economic conditions prevailing at the time and were subsequently substantially revised.17Together, these factors, combined with the FOMC's forward guidance discussed earlier, contributed to a delay in the removal of monetary policy accommodation in 2021. The shift in the Committee's forward guidance toward the end of 2021 and in early 2022 was effective in moving longer-dated interest rates higher and in tightening financial conditions, even before the FOMC raised the federal funds rate.18At our November 2021 meeting, we announced that we would begin to slow the pace of purchases later that month. At the December 2021 meeting, we doubled the pace of tapering, which accelerated the end of purchases to the following March. At the March 2022 FOMC meeting, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. And in May, the FOMC announced its plan to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings—which then stood at around $8.5 trillion—starting in June and at a pace much faster than in the previous episode of balance sheet reduction.19The FOMC also continued to increase the target range for the federal funds rate over the course of 2022 at a pace much faster than in previous tightening cycles, as it became clear that inflation was higher and more persistent than many forecasters had expected. By July 2023, the FOMC had increased the federal funds rate to 5-1/4 percentage points, and into restrictive territory, where it has remained. And we have continued to reduce the size of our securities holdings. The monetary policy experience during the pandemic highlights how difficult it can be to assess the current state of the economy and to predict how it will evolve in the presence of major supply- and demand-side shocks, possible structural changes in the economy, and real-time data and measurement uncertainty. An important question I will be thinking about going forward is how to make monetary policy decisions and communications more robust to these types of risks. Separate tools for monetary policy and financial stabilityWe know that monetary policy transmission is most effective during periods of stable financial conditions, and that financial stability risks, if realized, can affect the economic outlook. While monetary policy and financial stability are connected, financial stability vulnerabilities and risks are most appropriately addressed using macro- and micro-prudential regulation and bank supervision. During periods of extreme financial stress, well-calibrated lending and liquidity programs can be used to address such conditions. Of course, where risks impact the outlook for economic activity, employment, and inflation, a monetary policy response may also be required. The Federal Reserve's use of liquidity and lending programs during the early stages of the pandemic demonstrated the effectiveness of emergency lending tools as backstops to support market functioning and the flow of credit in times of stress.20Lending programs are most effective as backstops when loans are offered at a penalty rate and are of short duration. When appropriately calibrated, they can help promote market functioning and the effective transmission of monetary policy but limit the Federal Reserve's overall footprint in financial markets in the longer term. This experience also highlights the importance of clearly distinguishing monetary policy actions from temporary central bank asset purchase programs used to promote core financial market functioning, like those created to support Treasury markets in the spring of 2020.21 More recently, the bank failures last spring highlight that responsive, efficient, and effective bank supervision is a strong mitigant for financial system risks and vulnerabilities. The failures revealed that shortcomings in bank supervision can heighten financial stability risks. The primary focus of supervision should be to address a bank's critical shortcomings in a timely way.22To effectively support financial stability, bank supervision cannot simply rely on pinpointing compliance issues, failed processes, or rule violations. It must go further to examine a bank's risk exposures, including anticipating how the evolving economic environment may influence a bank's financial condition and its assessment of risks. If the supervisory process fails to identify and escalate critical risks, or to hold management accountable for known deficiencies, like excess interest rate risk and disproportionately large levels of uninsured deposits, this raises the potential for safety and soundness concerns. Last year's bank stress also revealed that the Fed's bank liquidity and payments tools—including the Fed's discount window operations and FedWire®—should be available for extended operating hours and prepared to provide support during times of stress. We should also consider what further steps may be needed to ensure that banks have access to liquidity support. In addition, we should encourage, but not mandate, the exercise of contingency funding plans and testing capabilities, requiring bank management to ensure adequate plans are in place.23But there is a fine line between bank supervision and interfering in the decisions of bank management. Some measure of risk is inherent and necessary in the business of banking. While some changes to the regulatory framework may be appropriate to promote financial stability, we should be cautious that these changes do not impair the long-term viability of banks, especially mid-sized and smaller banks.24In my view, regulatory reform can pose significant financial stability risks, particularly if those regulatory changes fail to take sufficient account of the incentive effects and potential consequences, like pushing activity into the more opaque nonbank financial sector.25Poorly calibrated regulatory actions can also negatively affect economic activity and reduce the availability of credit by limiting the offering of other financial products or services. These concerns are most acute when the reforms may be inefficient or poorly targeted. As an example, policymakers should carefully consider whether the significant capital increases included in the U.S. Basel III proposal meet this standard of being efficient and appropriately targeted.26 What's Next for the Economy and Monetary Policy?Looking ahead, the FOMC will continue to face a number of risks and uncertainties as it seeks to return inflation to its 2 percent goal. It will be important to evaluate how these uncertainties and risks affect our monetary policy decisions going forward. As this audience knows, members of the FOMC consult a range of models that consider several scenarios and their potential economic outcomes using different benchmark monetary policy rules.27This type of analysis can provide helpful input in informing my own views on the appropriate path of monetary policy. Given the importance of transparency, it is also necessary that our communications explain not only how the economic outlook affects our monetary policy decisions, often referred to as the FOMC's "reaction function," but also how the risks and uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook matter for those decisions. With that in mind, I will conclude my remarks with my own views on the near-term economic outlook, including some prominent risks and uncertainties, and the implications for monetary policy. At our most recent FOMC meeting, I supported keeping the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and continuing to reduce our securities holdings. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance is restrictive and appears to be appropriately calibrated to reduce inflationary pressures. We have seen significant progress on lowering inflation over the past year while economic activity and the labor market have remained strong. Consumer services spending has shown continued strength through February, and payroll employment increased at a very strong pace in the first quarter. However, most employment gains over the past year have been in part-time employment, and some of the recent strength in job gains may reflect stronger labor supply due to increased immigration. The 12-month readings of total and core PCE inflation through February printed at 2.5 and 2.8 percent, respectively, much lower than a year ago. However, with the annualized 3‑month PCE inflation readings moving well-above the 12‑month measures in February, I expect further progress in bringing inflation down to 2 percent will be slower this year. Still, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady at its current level, and that the labor market will remain strong but with labor demand and supply gradually rebalancing as the number of job openings relative to unemployed workers declines. And should the incoming data continue to indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower the federal funds rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. However, we are still not yet at the point where it is appropriate to lower the policy rate, and I continue to see a number of upside risks to inflation. First, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements, including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due in part to immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unclear whether further supply-side improvements will continue to lower inflation. For example, the rebound in labor productivity last year may have reflected an unwinding of temporary pandemic-related labor market dynamics, such as a slowing in the high levels of employee turnover during that time. Therefore, if wage gains remain elevated going forward, these effects may no longer contribute to lower price inflation in the future. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, including the risk of spillovers from geopolitical conflicts and the extent to which food and energy markets and supply chains remain exposed to these influences. Another upside inflation risk I see is from additional fiscal stimulus or a higher spend-out rate from existing and new appropriations. Although some of the recent policies may increase productive capacity in the medium term, they may add to inflationary pressures by boosting aggregate demand. I also see upside risks to housing services inflation. Given the current low inventory of available and affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to certain regions could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. There is also a risk that continued labor market tightness and continued strong services demand could lead to persistently higher core services inflation. Inflation readings over the past two months suggest progress may be uneven or slower going forward, especially for core services. Finally, there is uncertainty regarding whether the federal funds rate will need to remain at a higher level than before the pandemic in order to effectively foster low and stable inflation and support full employment. In my view, given potential structural changes in the economy, like higher investment demand relative to available savings, it is quite possible that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with low and stable inflation will be higher than before the pandemic. If that is the case, fewer rate cuts will eventually be appropriate to return our monetary policy stance to a neutral level. In the most recent SEP, some FOMC participants indicated that they now see fewer rate cuts over 2024 and over the next two years than in December. Some also included a higher longer-run level of the federal funds rate than in the past.28 While it is not my baseline outlook, I continue to see the risk that at a future meeting we may need to increase the policy rate further should progress on inflation stall or even reverse. Given the risks and uncertainties regarding my economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy, and I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. Reducing our policy rate too soon or too quickly could result in a rebound in inflation, requiring further future policy rate increases to return inflation to 2 percent over the longer run. Closing ThoughtsTo conclude, the experience over the past five years highlights the enduring challenge of setting forward-looking monetary policy amid a wide and evolving range of risks and uncertainties. Taking into account this experience and the lessons I have learned over my tenure on the FOMC, an important question I will be considering is how to make monetary policy strategy and its related communications durable to a wide range of possible shocks and changes in the macroeconomy. We will continue to learn about the post-pandemic economy, and, if history is any guide, new shocks to and changes in the economy will eventually and inevitably occur. While the future is full of risks and uncertainties, the FOMC's mandate of fostering price stability and maximum employment remains very clear. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you today. I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Greenspan (2004), Bernanke (2007), and Powell (2018) offer discussions of how risk and uncertainty may influence monetary policy in practice. See Alan Greenspan (2004), "Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy,"American Economic Review,vol. 94 (May), pp. 33–40; Ben S. Bernanke (2007), "Monetary Policy under Uncertainty," speech delivered at the 32nd Annual Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis (via videoconference), October 19; and Jerome H. Powell (2018), "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 24.Return to text 3. For example, the range of estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate in theSummary of Economic Projections (SEP) in March 2013was 5.0 to 6.0 percent. This range shifted lower over time. In the most recent (March 2024)SEP,the range of estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate was 3.7 to 4.3 percent. The March 2013 and March 2024 SEPs are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 4. For an overview of these revisions and their rationale, see Jerome H. Powell (2020), "New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, August, 31.Return to text 5. See the most recent Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf(quoted text in paragraph 5). Previous versions of the statement had noted that the Committee would seek to mitigate "deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal anddeviations[emphasis added] of employment from the Committee's assessments of its maximum level" (paragraph 5). For a more detailed look at the changes in the 2020 strategy statement relative to the earlier statement first adopted in 2012, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), "Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications," webpage.Return to text 6. See Richard H. Clarida, "The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance," speech delivered at "SOMC: The Federal Reserve's New Policy Framework," a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York, New York (via webcast), April 14, 2021.Return to text 7. See the latest Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, in note [5] (quoted text in paragraph 4).Return to text 8. The statement did note that if the Committee's employment and inflation objectives were no longer complementary, the Committee would take into account both employment shortfalls and inflation deviations as well as the time horizons over which employment and inflation were projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate.Return to text 9. The Federal Reserve implemented 13 emergency lending and liquidity facilities under its emergency lending authorities and undertook supervisory and regulatory actions to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and local governments. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Funding, Credit, Liquidity, and Loan Facilities," webpage;and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Supervisory and Regulatory Actions in Response to COVID-19," webpage.Return to text 10. The March 15, 2020, FOMC statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm(quoted text in paragraph 2).Return to text 11. The September 2020 FOMC statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm(quoted text in paragraph 4).Return to text 12. The December 2020 FOMC statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm(quoted text in paragraph 4).Return to text 13. See, for example, the discussion of policy normalization principles in the December 2021 FOMC minutes, which can be found on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 14. In the U.S., fiscal programs and policies included stimulus checks, expanded unemployment insurance, the Paycheck Protection Program, and other CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) and ARP Act (American Rescue Plan Act) programs designed to support businesses, households, and state and local governments.Return to text 15. See the SEP released following the September 2021 FOMC meeting, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 16. Private-sector forecasts reflect the consensus estimate in the Blue Chip survey of business forecasters in June 2021.Return to text 17. For example, both the August and September 2021 employment reports suggested much lower job growth than did consensus forecasts, and these initial estimates were subsequently sizably increased. Similarly, total PCE inflation for nearly all quarters in 2021 has been revised higher than initially reported. See the real-time data on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's ALFRED website athttps://alfred.stlouisfed.org/series/downloaddata?seid=PAYEMS(job growth) andhttps://alfred.stlouisfed.org/series/downloaddata?seid=PCECTPI(PCE inflation).Return to text 18. See the November 2021 FOMC statement, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 19. See the May 2023 FOMC statement, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 20. For details on these programs, see Board of Governors, "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19):Funding, Credit, Liquidity, and Loan Facilities," in note [9]. The Federal Reserve also took a number of other actions, including easing terms on discount window lending and supervisory and regulatory actions, to encourage banks to lend and act as market intermediaries.Return to text 21. See Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "Panel on 'Design Issues for Central Bank Facilities in the Future," speech delivered at the Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets Workshop on Market Dysfunction, Chicago, March 3.Return to text 22. See Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision and Regulation," speech delivered at the New York Bankers Association's Financial Services Forum, Palm Beach, Fla., November 9.Return to text 23. See Michelle W. Bowman (2023), "Financial Stability in Uncertain Times," speech delivered at the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee and Policy Center for the New South Marrakech Economic Festival, Marrakech, Morocco, October 11.Return to text 24. See Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "The Future of Banking," speech delivered at the 157th Assembly for Bank Directors, Southwestern Graduate School of Banking, Maui, Hawaii, February 2.Return to text 25. See Bowman, "Financial Stability in Uncertain Times," in note [23].Return to text 26. See Michelle W. Bowman (2024), "The Path Forward for Bank Capital Reform," speech delivered at Protect Main Street, sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington (virtual), January 17.Return to text 27. See, for example, the box "Monetary Policy Rules in the Current Environment" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024),Monetary Policy Report (PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, March), pp. 41–43; and Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (2024), "Simple Monetary Policy Rules," webpage.Return to text 28. See the March 2024 and December 2023 SEPs, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the Weidenbaum Center on the Economy, Government, and Public Policy, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Thank you, Andrew, and thank you for the opportunity to speak here today.1I am very pleased to be talking here at the Weidenbaum Center. As an economist currently working on policy, but with a long trajectory in research, I particularly appreciate the center's multidisciplinary approach to building bridges between these two applications of economics. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been working to lower inflation in the context of our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Today I will discuss economic developments in the U.S. and how I view the current stance of monetary policy in light of recent data and longer-run trends. Since I am an economist, you will not be surprised that I will talk about recent economic developments by highlighting the dynamics of supply and demand. As you all know, inflation began to rise in 2021. By mid-2022, 12-month inflation, based on the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, was around 7 percent—much too high and far above the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run objective. But since that time, PCE inflation has slowed significantly, declining to 5.4 percent at the end of 2022, then to 2.6 percent at the end of 2023, and then to 2.5 percent in February. Inflation can sometimes be hard to read from overall PCE inflation figures due to the volatility of food and energy prices. For that reason, it is sometimes helpful to focus on "core" PCE inflation, which excludes those categories and is a better guide to the direction of inflation. Core PCE inflation peaked at a rate above 5-1/2 percent in early 2022 but fell rapidly during 2023. In fact, the core PCE disinflation we saw last year was the fastest since the early 1980s. The progress has sometimes been bumpy from month to month, and, indeed, January and February of this year showed a bit of firming in the inflation data. But the January numbers, in particular, featured some atypical or seasonal factors that suggest a need to withhold judgment. The 12-month core PCE rate now stands at 2.8 percent. That rate represents considerable progress, but it is still meaningfully above the FOMC's 2 percent target. I like to think about core PCE inflation in terms of three main components: goods, housing services, and non-housing services. Twelve-month inflation for core goods peaked first, reaching about 7-1/2 percent in early 2022. But goods inflation cooled quickly, and in February goods prices were nearly half a percentage point below their level a year ago. Services inflation peaked later and has cooled less quickly. Within services, housing services—a measure of the cost of rent, and the equivalent for owner-occupied housing—rose above 8 percent early last year but was 5.8 percent in February. Housing services inflation is naturally persistent because tenant rents often have year-long lease agreements, and estimates of owner-occupied housing costs are imputed based in large part using those tenant rents. Data on new tenant rent agreements suggest that housing inflation broadly will continue to cool. Finally, inflation in core non-housing services hovered between 4-1/2 and 5-1/2 percent from mid-2021 through mid-2023 but began cooling after that, reaching 3.3 percent in February. Continued disinflation will indeed require further progress in housing and non-housing services. The rise and subsequent easing of inflation in recent years were related to both supply and demand factors. This development has been confirmed by granular, "bottom-up" statistical research looking at price and quantity changes within narrow product categories. Roughly speaking, if a price goes up while quantity goes down, that is an indication that a negative supply shock is dominating; if price and quantity move in the same direction, that is an indication that a demand shock is dominating. Research using this method finds that, for the economy broadly, demand shocks accounted for roughly two-thirds of the 2021 pickup in, and 2023 slowing of, core PCE inflation, with the remaining one-third related to supply. The role of supply is somewhat larger in a narrower analysis focused on the domestic manufacturing sector.2"Top-down" research looking at aggregate time-series data also found significant contributions for both supply and demand factors.3 Let me be a bit more concrete about this point by discussing supply and demand for goods and services in turn. Supply in some goods-producing industries, like motor vehicles, was held down for some time by pandemic-related plant shutdowns, shortages, and transportation bottlenecks. And demand for goods surged during the pandemic when consumers shied away from in-person services. Businesses frequently highlighted shortages of materials as having held down production during the period when supply was tight and demand was strong. Those pressures have eased considerably (though perhaps not completely). Supply chains and production have largely recovered, and there are signs that goods demand growth since then has eased. For example, the share of consumer spending devoted to goods rather than services has moved back closer to its pre-pandemic trend after rising sharply in 2020. Regarding services, particularly non-housing services, the most important input to services production tends to be labor.4For that reason, it is useful to talk about supply and demand for labor. Labor supply was held down significantly in the early stages of the pandemic as workers voluntarily and, in some cases, involuntarily stayed out of the workforce. Older workers, in particular, left the labor force in a wave of early retirements, and, tragically, COVID‑19 caused a rise in mortality. Additionally, many prime-age workers—those between the ages of 25 and 54—stayed out of the labor market for a time, perhaps because of health concerns or family care challenges. And immigration was relatively low during the pandemic. But labor supply has been recovering. While most older individuals have not, as a whole, returned to the labor force, many prime-age workers have. Prime-age women, in particular, have significantly increased their labor force participation, which reached an all-time high last year and remains close to that all-time high. Moreover, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that net immigration increased to above 2-1/2 million in 2022 and 3-1/2 million in 2023. If the CBO analysis is correct, population growth has been a sizable contributor to overall labor force growth. A more subtle source of labor supply improvement has been improved quality of matches between workers and firms—how well suited particular workers are, by talent, experience, and preferences, to their employers. In the wake of, and until the end of, the pandemic, we saw a heightened pace of workers quitting their jobs and finding new ones, a process that economists generally believe improves matches. Indeed, evidence suggests workers and firms have been fairly efficient at finding each other over the past couple of years.5High-quality job matches act like additional labor supply: Both firms and workers are likely to be more productive when workers' skills and preferences are a good match for their employers' needs. On the demand side, labor demand was strong in 2021 and 2022. Demand was so strong, in fact, that the job openings rate—that is, the monthly number of job openings relative to total employment—ran almost 50 percent above its pre-pandemic record all the way from July 2021 through July 2022.6 But the job openings rate has declined roughly 30 percent from its peak, a sign that labor demand—while still robust—has cooled significantly. So the labor market has moved into better balance. Importantly, given the strong labor supply growth, supply–demand imbalances can continue to ease even amid a solid pace of net job growth, as we have been seeing. Indeed, I suspect that strong population growth helps resolve the puzzle that forecasters have faced over the past year, in which measures of labor market growth—and growth of other economic variables, like consumption—have been solid even amid easing inflation.7 As labor markets have moved into better balance, wage growth has cooled—which means that increases in the main cost business in the services sector have slowed, easing inflationary pressures. Workers and families do not reap the benefit of higher wages if those gains are eaten up by inflation. For that reason, it is important that wage growth be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. The U.S. economy is moving back toward that kind of wage growth, including in services industries: The 12-month growth of average hourly earnings in private services has come down to about 4 percent from a peak pace above 6 percent in early 2022. And despite the cooling of wage growth, with inflation easing over the past year, we have seen broader wage increases again outpacing price gains, that is, real wage gains. But you may ask: What role has the FOMC played in all of this? While supply conditions are beyond the control of monetary policymakers, the FOMC can influence the pace of inflation by tightening monetary policy to slow the growth of aggregate demand. The FOMC began raising its policy interest rate in early 2022 and proceeded expeditiously. These actions have damped aggregate demand, with the most pronounced effects on interest rate–sensitive sectors. For example, in 2023, the level of residential investment was about 19 percent below its 2021 level, reflecting a much lower pace of home purchases. And business investment in machines has seen somewhat tepid growth lately, even contracting a bit last year, though I note that the construction of new factories has been surging, perhaps partly related to recent legislation, which will boost supply over the longer run. More broadly, financial conditions have been a drag on aggregate demand, as suggested by the Federal Reserve Board's FCI-G (Financial Conditions Impulse on Growth) index, which estimates the overall effect on gross domestic product (GDP) of changes in financial conditions, including interest rates, asset prices, and exchange rates. This measure moved well into restrictive territory in mid-2022 and remained quite restrictive for some time, though it has become less restrictive recently. In addition to the direct actions taken to tighten monetary policy, the FOMC has also helped cool inflation through its communication with the public. In particular, the FOMC's stated commitment to bring inflation back to 2 percent, coupled with its actions to tighten policy, has helped ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored—that is, that households and firms believe that inflation will return to the Committee's target. Anchored expectations are evident in surveys of consumers conducted by the University of Michigan and the New York Fed. Separately, a Richmond Fed survey shows a close relation between firms' expectations of overall inflation and their own price-setting plans. As the effects of earlier supply and demand shocks fade, firms with anchored inflation expectations will bring their price-setting decisions back into alignment with the FOMC's inflation target. One way they might do so is by adjusting their prices less frequently. Before the pandemic, the typical price lasted more than 10 months, but by early 2022, it was lasting fewer than 5 months while inflation was near its recent peak. Since then, the frequency of price adjustments has slowed considerably, and by the fourth quarter of last year, the typical price was lasting more than 7 months.8 Let me now turn to the outlook for this year. Given my thinking about the role of supply and demand in recent inflation dynamics, as well as the role anchored inflation expectations are playing in bringing price-setting behavior back to normal, I expect the disinflationary trend to continue. There is still a bit of room for further supply improvement, especially in the services sector, where solid labor supply growth will continue to ease wage and inflation pressures. On the demand side, I expect consumption growth to slow some this year, as households have drawn down large balances of excess savings accumulated during the pandemic and are facing restrictive financial conditions. We may already be seeing some of that slowing; consumer spending was soft in January and February, on average, suggesting that we are on track for lower consumption growth in the first quarter than we saw during the second half of last year. With less support from consumers, I expect GDP growth this year to be solid but slower than last year's strong 3.1 percent pace. Even with demand growth cooling, given the backdrop of solid supply, my baseline expectation is that further disinflation can be accomplished without a significant rise in unemployment. That said, the future is uncertain, and I am attentive to risks—both upside risks to my inflation outlook and downside risks to the outlook for economic activity. For upside risks, global developments such as the wars in Europe and the Middle East could spark an increase in commodity prices or further disruptions to shipping networks. The tragic recent bridge collapse in Baltimore and effects on the Port of Baltimore could also pose some risk, though it appears that shipping networks are adapting. Additionally, consumption growth could turn out to be stronger than expected, particularly because of the wage gains we have seen across all income groups—but especially among the lowest earners who have an especially high propensity to spend out of their income.9Indeed, consumption was surprisingly strong last year and made solid contributions to GDP growth in the third and fourth quarters, though some of that strength may have been related to strong population growth which, more generally, was likely disinflationary. But there are also downside risks to economic activity. Measures of consumer credit delinquencies have been on the rise, which might point to a more significant slowing of consumer spending than expected. And labor markets can sometimes deteriorate very quickly, without much warning in closely watched spending data. The February employment report featured a rise in the unemployment rate, half of which was accounted for by layoffs. I study a range of layoff indicators, both in the official data and in measures based on information contained in publicly traded firms' earnings reports or Google searches, and I will continue to watch a whole range of indicators closely. Finally, let me briefly discuss monetary policy. As I have noted, policy is currently restrictive, and my baseline expectation is that disinflation will continue without a broad economic slowdown—though such an outcome is not assured. In considering the appropriate path of monetary policy, I am guided by the FOMC's dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. After the March FOMC meeting, the Committee said that it "does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent."10After that meeting, we also published the Summary of Economic Projections, which summarizes the forecasts of FOMC participants. Most FOMC participants expect that it will be appropriate to begin lowering the federal funds rate sometime this year. My own expectation is consistent with that; if disinflation and labor market conditions proceed as I am currently expecting, then some lowering of the policy rate this year would be appropriate. However, I will remain attentive to the totality of the data and be prepared to change my economic and policy outlook if conditions change. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. For explaining core PCE inflation generally, see Adam Hale Shapiro (2022), "Decomposing Supply and Demand Driven Inflation," Working Paper Series 2022-18 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October; revised February 2024), available athttps://doi.org/10.24148/wp2022-18. With regard to the manufacturing sector specifically, recent work by the Federal Reserve Board staff focused on manufacturing production and producer price indexes and used additional supply information from the Census Bureau's Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization. That research found a roughly 50–50 split between supply and demand. See Robin Braun, Aaron Flaaen, and Sinem Hacioglu Hoke (2024), "Supply vs Demand Factors Influencing Prices of Manufactured Goods," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 23).Return to text 3. See Olivier J. Blanchard and Ben S. Bernanke (2023), "What Caused the U.S. Pandemic-Era Inflation?" NBER Working Paper Series 31417 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June).Return to text 4. For example, labor costs are more than 80 percent of value-added in education and health services and nearly 60 percent in leisure and hospitality services. See Bureau of Economic Analysis (2023), "Interactive Data," tables on composition of gross output by industry, December.Return to text 5. For example, one popular measure of "matching efficiency" shows an initial decline early in the pandemic but a robust recovery to pre-pandemic levels. See Simon Mongey and Jeff Horwich (2023), "Are Job Vacancies Still as Plentiful as They Appear? Implications for the 'Soft Landing'" (Minneapolis, Minn.: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, December 1).Return to text 6. The data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey. The pre-pandemic record job openings rate was 4.8 percent in late 2018 and early 2019. The rate averaged 7.1 percent from July 2021 through July 2022. The absolute peak job openings rate was 7.4 percent in March 2022.Return to text 7. For an analysis of the implications of CBO population estimates for labor markets and consumer spending, see Wendy Edelberg and Tara Watson (2024), "New Immigration Estimates Help Make Sense of the Pace of Employment" (Washington: Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution, March 7), available athttps://www.brookings.edu/articles/new-immigration-estimates-help-make-sense-of-the-pace-of-employment.Return to text 8. These facts are from Hugh Montag and Daniel Villar (2023), "Price-Setting during the Covid Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 29). I thank the authors for providing me with updated data through 2023:Q4.Return to text 9. Since the pandemic, workers at the low end of the wage distribution have seen the strongest wage growth, which is apparent in the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker. For a discussion, see the recentMonetary Policy Report (PDF): Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024),Monetary Policy Report(Washington: Board of Governors, March).Return to text 10. See the March 2024 FOMC statement, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm(quoted text in paragraph 3).Return to text