The Federal Open Market Committee on Friday announced its tentative meeting schedule for 2025 and 2026. For 2025: For 2026: The Committee releases a policy statement at 2 p.m. Eastern Time on the second day of each regularly scheduled meeting, and the Chair holds a news conference at 2:30 p.m. Eastern Time the same day. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced its approval of the application by Bank7, located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, to establish a branch at 4003 East 51st Street, Tulsa, Oklahoma. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced its approval of the application by OakNorth Bank plc, of London, England, to establish a representative office in New York, New York. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
Following its stress test earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced final individual capital requirements for all large banks, effective on October 1. Large bank capital requirements are informed by the Board's stress test results, which provide a risk-sensitive and forward-looking assessment of capital needs. The table shows each bank's common equity tier 1 capital requirement, which is made up of several components, including: If a bank's capital dips below its total requirement announced today, the bank is subject to automatic restrictions on both capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. Also today, the Board announced that it had modified the stress capital buffer requirement for Goldman Sachs, after the firm's request for reconsideration. Based on an analysis of additional information presented by the firm in its request, the Board determined it would be appropriate to adjust the treatment of particular historical expenses incurred by the bank in the stress testing models' input data, due to the non-recurring nature of those expenses. As a result, the bank's stress capital buffer requirement has been adjusted to 6.2 percent from a preliminary 6.4 percent. The Board is focused on continuously improving the stress testing framework. To that end, the Board will analyze whether to revise regulatory reporting forms to better capture these types of data and to explore possible refinements to certain model components. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Large Bank Capital Requirements (PDF) Reconsideration Process Response Letter (PDF) 2024 Federal Reserve Stress Test Results (PDF) Stress Test Results 2014-2024 (CSV) Q&A on reporting of portfolio layer method hedges
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced that it is seeking individuals with a diverse set of expert insurance perspectives in life, property and casualty, and reinsurance issues to serve on its Insurance Policy Advisory Committee, or IPAC. The IPAC is comprised of 21 members who serve staggered three-year terms and have diverse professional backgrounds, including insurance accounting, actuarial science, academia, insurance regulation, and policyholder advocacy. Each year, the Board selects seven individuals to each serve three-year terms. The Board may select additional individuals to fill any term that is unexpired and vacated by an existing member. Interested individuals may submit a Statement of Interest to the Board between Monday, August 5 and Monday, October 7, 2024. The Board plans to announce the appointment of members later this year. Additional information about the selection process, including instructions on how to apply for IPAC membership, can be found in theFederal Registernotice. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Solicitation of Statements of Interest for Membership on the Insurance Policy Advisory Committee (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Customers Bancorp, Inc., West Reading, Pennsylvania and Customers Bank, Malvern, PennsylvaniaWritten Agreement dated August 5, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Heritage Bancshares Group Inc. Employee Stock Ownership Plan and Trust, Spicer, Minnesota, and Heritage Bancshares Group, Inc., Spicer, MinnesotaWritten Agreement dated August 6, 2024 SNB Bancshares, Inc., Eufaula, Oklahoma, and Bank of Eufaula, Eufaula, OklahomaWritten Agreement dated August 7, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday issued final joint guidance to help certain large banks further develop their resolution plans. The final guidance is largely similar to theproposed guidancefrom August 2023 and incorporates changes in response to comments received. The Board developed the guidance jointly with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and it is now final following both agencies' approval. These resolution plans, also known as living wills, describe a bank's strategy for orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure. The guidance generally applies to domestic and foreign banks with more than $250 billion in total assets but that are not the largest and most complex banks, for which guidance is already in place. The guidance addresses the specific characteristics of, and risks posed by, this group of banks. The guidance is organized around key areas of potential vulnerability, such as capital, liquidity, and operational capabilities that could be needed in resolution. Distinct from the guidance to the largest and most complex banks, this guidance provides agency expectations for both single point of entry and multiple point of entry resolution strategies, which are different strategies banks have adopted for their rapid and orderly resolution. It also recognizes that the preferred resolution outcome for foreign banks is often a successful home country-led resolution and guides foreign banks on how to address the global resolution plan in their U.S. plan. The agencies also announced that they are extending the resolution plan submission deadline for the banks to which the guidance applies. Banks will be required to submit their resolution plans by October 1, 2025, instead of March 31, 2025. The purpose of the extension is to provide reasonable time for banks to consider the final guidance as they develop their plan submissions. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Board Memo (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Guidance for Resolution Plan Submissions of Domestic Triennial Full Filers Federal Registernotice: Guidance for Resolution Plan Submissions of Foreign Triennial Full Filers Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday requested comment on a proposed rule that would establish data standards for certain information collections submitted to financial regulatory agencies. In addition to the Board, the standards have been proposed by several other federal financial regulatory agencies. The proposal would promote interoperability of data collected by financial regulatory agencies through the establishment of data standards for identifiers of legal entities and other data elements. This proposal is part of the implementation of the Financial Data Transparency Act of 2022. Once the final standards are established, the Board will issue a separate rule that adopts those standards for certain information collected by the Board. Comments on the proposal are due 60 days following publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected]. Federal Registernotice: Financial Data Transparency Act Joint Data Standards Comments:Submit|View
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Global Fintech Fest, Mumbai, India Thank you to the conference organizers for the opportunity to speak this year at the Global Fintech Fest—a place where there is so much payments innovation.1The technology-driven payments revolution in India has been enabled by a public-private partnership to build the "technology stack" of digital platforms that has broadened financial inclusion and done so at low costs.2Building on the foundation established by the public sector, innovators in the private sector seized the opportunity to enhance payments through the introduction of new capabilities that alleviate frictions while remaining within regulatory guardrails. In today's remarks, I am going to touch on how interplay between the public and private sectors may be the key to advancing cross-border payments. Now that fast payment systems have been established around much of the globe—in over 70 countries and climbing—attention is turning to how these newer systems could potentially enhance global payments. Specifically, interlinking fast payment systems has been identified as a possible means to deliver enhanced cross-border payments for consumers and businesses. Interlinking arrangements would allow banks in different countries who are users of domestic fast payment systems to send payments to each other through technical connections between their respective domestic systems. As you all know, interlinking is one of the areas outlined in the G20 roadmap for further exploration as part of a holistic effort to enhance cross-border payments. The overarching G20 goal is to mitigate challenges with cross-border payments in a coordinated way at a global level, with input from key stakeholders including the private sector. The G20 roadmap addresses a new topic that payments industry stakeholders have been circling around for years—more cost-effective and timely cross-border payments for consumers and businesses. This policy goal has been advanced by the Federal Reserve over time in various payment system improvement initiatives, dating back to the late 1990s when the Federal Reserve began adapting the automated clearinghouse (ACH) service to support international payments, and more recently in 2015 when we collaborated with industry to improve the payment system.3Today's consumers and businesses can generally send a payment anywhere in the world, but they all seem to want faster and cheaper global payments, just like we always want faster flights and cheaper airfares. However, I am not entirely convinced that interlinking arrangements will necessarily deliver on those goals. Let me explain with some context. Faster and cheaper cross-border paymentsNot all frictions that slow payments down are bad. Certain frictions are purposely built into the global payment system for compliance and risk-management reasons. Slowing down the speed at which payments are cleared and settled helps banks prevent money laundering and counter the financing of terrorism, detect fraud, and recover fraudulent or misdirected cross-border payments. Granted, the practice today of sending payments through an often complex chain of correspondent banks contributes to slower payments that could benefit from efficiency enhancements. However, there is no silver bullet that increases speed and efficiency without tradeoffs. Unless new solutions are found, interlinking fast payment systems might increase the risk-management burden for banks that participate in them. That is, legal, compliance, and operational considerations are critical to the discussion of the promise and challenges of interlinking. Governance, oversight, and settlement arrangements also need to be thought through, along with considerations for data privacy. In addition, can we assume that all parties to a cross-border transaction want faster payments? The fundamental friction in any transaction is that the seller of an object—a can of soup, an hour of labor, or a good manufactured for export—wants to receive their money as fast as possible. However, the buyer of the object, or the buyer's intermediary, typically has an incentive to wait as long as they can to pay for something they have purchased. Under this logic, senders need to be properly incentivized to speed up cross-border payments. The one exception may be person-to-person remittances, where workers from other countries want to send money home, and recipients want access, as fast as possible. But remittances are only a small percentage of the value of cross-border payments, so we'd need to weigh the benefits against the costs of a potential public-sector intervention to shift incentives. So, I am still left with the larger question of whether we should be incentivizing faster cross-border payments. Suppose we do want to incentivize senders by lowering costs of faster payments—whose responsibility is it to do that? Should it be left to private-sector competition to drive down costs as is typically the case with other products? Or is there something unique about payments that requires central banks or payment system operators to step in to interlink their networks with the goal of bringing costs down? We have already seen examples of the private sector leveraging technology to innovate in the market for cross-border instant payments, both at the wholesale and retail level. For example, we have seen a real-time payment system built for wholesale clients that allows clearing and settlement between global clients in seconds, with necessary compliance performed upfront in less than 24 hours. Another example is the SWIFT Global Payments Innovation, which offers improved speed and transparency for the business customers of participating banks, and, by their account, has been adopted by 150 banks globally. In mentioning these examples, I am not intending to endorse certain private-sector services. Rather, these newer services are illustrative of how market forces and competition can meet consumer and business demands for more efficient cross-border payments. In the United States we have experience with offering low-cost international ACH payments. We provided direct ACH linkages from the United States to Europe and Canada, but after more than 20 years, the banks were not using it, and we stopped the service. It is possible that a fast payment interlinking arrangement adopted by Federal Reserve would be more effective for our bank customers than the former ACH service, but we would proceed cautiously to carefully consider the costs and benefits. Economic viability needs to be a cornerstone for any action we may take. We need to ask ourselves whether banks would find a central bank interlinking service more effective than their existing arrangements for cross-border payments, and if they would actually use it. Practical aspects of interlinking fast payment systemsWe know from basic economic theory that payment systems are similar to other networks in that greater participation is necessary for the network to grow and increase value to its users. This is true on a global scale, too, which in practical terms means that valuable global interlinked networks would have to be founded on underlying domestic networks with a breadth of senders and receivers. Domestic networks need to be developed first. If this condition is not in place, interlinked networks could end up being a road to nowhere. Building out domestic networks has been done in different ways. In some countries the central bank has authority to mandate participation, notably in Brazil with the successful Pix system. In other countries, notably India, united efforts by the government, central bank, and private sector established the digital public infrastructure that enabled broad adoption. In the United States, it's a different story, and the payments landscape is unique. With over 9,000 depository institutions and different authorities than other countries, the Federal Reserve determined that it needed to build a fast payment system accessible to all depository institutions to achieve our policy goals. At the time of our decision, there was only one private-sector instant payment system in the market, built by the largest banks. Based on our experience, we did not believe that this system would ultimately reach all depository institutions, nor would other private-sector systems emerge to compete with it and extend the scope of that service. Yet we knew from industry engagement that smaller banks across the country wanted a broadly accessible fast payment system, so we stepped in to address the clear coordination problem. This action is very much consistent with the Federal Reserve's role in the U.S. payment system historically. We have seen widespread adoption of the FedNow Service in just a little over a year since implementation, with close to 1,000 depository institutions on the network including many of the largest banks that will drive origination volume. Yet we are still at the beginning of a multiyear journey of establishing a ubiquitous network covering the majority of institutions in our country. Variation around the world in domestic fast payment network adoption means that the value of globally interlinked systems is not yet clear. From a technical perspective, the promise of interlinking, which is essentially interoperability between or among domestic fast payment systems, is that fast payment networks can just "connect"' with each other and move payments globally. It sounds simple. In practice, however, achieving interoperability is not simple. Technology is probably the easiest part. The legal, compliance, settlement, and governance challenges I mentioned earlier are more substantial. In addition, even when technological connections are in place, payments may not actually be instant as they traverse across systems because of domestic variations in ISO 20022 implementation, which is the global standard used by most fast payment systems. To send an ISO message seamlessly from one country to another across a technical link, operators need to coordinate and align on common practices. We should consider that new multilateral arrangements for interlinking could potentially address some of the challenges that I have outlined. Today, certain countries have established bilateral links between domestic fast payment systems primarily to support remittance payments. These arrangements demonstrate that linkages are technically possible and that legal and compliance issues can be addressed. Yet each link is unique and requires resource-intensive negotiation and alignment between parties. Establishing bilateral links across the globe simply will not scale. We know this to be true from our own bilateral ACH linkages, where each arrangement required bespoke agreements with correspondent banks and service providers. Multilateral arrangements might bring some efficiencies, yet they are no small undertaking. ConclusionTo sum up, overall, I do see the value of a coordination role for the public sector to improve cross-border payments, an effort in which the Federal Reserve has been and will continue to be heavily engaged. We will continue our engagement with international fora to improve the speed and efficiency of cross-border payments and to investigate the issues critical to interlinking payment systems. Our chief focus in the near-to mid-term, however, is continuing to build the FedNow network domestically and increasing participation in the service. We are also improving existing cross-border rails by considering expanded operating hours on our large-value, real-time gross settlement system, the Fedwire Funds Service, and by adopting ISO 20022, a globally accepted messaging standard. Looking out over the longer term, we will continue to conduct research and experimentation on emerging technologies to better understand the role these innovations could play in the payments landscape of the future. I expect the technical capabilities, legal infrastructure, and use cases for faster cross-border payments will evolve, and I look forward to following the private-sector innovation that will emerge from stakeholders represented at this event. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. The technology stack is a unified set of digital platforms that includes digital identity, payment rails, and data sharing policy. See Derryl D'Silva, Zuzana Filková, Frank Packer, and Siddharth Tiwari,"The design of digital financial infrastructure: lessons from India," (PDF)BIS Papers No 106 (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, December 2019).Return to text 3. See"Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System," (PDF)Federal Reserve System, last modified January 26, 2015 and"Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System: Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey," (PDF)Federal Reserve System, last modified September 6, 2017.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on July 22 and July 31, 2024. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on July 30–31, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeJuly 30–31, 2024:HTML|PDF
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payments, and Finance, Washington, D.C. Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you, Matt. I am delighted to welcome you all in person to the 2024 Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payments, and Finance, jointly organized by the Federal Reserve Board, the Bank of Canada, and the Study Center Gerzensee.1I want to thank the organizers for putting together such an interesting program and also thank the participants for their contributions. The evolving nature of money and banking creates new channels through which financial markets and institutions can affect the economy, with implications for all five of the Federal Reserve's functions, which are monetary policy, financial stability, supervision and regulation, payment systems, and consumers and communities. Relatedly, the emergence of new technologies can generate complex economic interactions, and theoretical research and analytical work are crucial to understanding the implications. Many of the concepts underlying such economic interactions have for years been the study of this workshop. When I was research director at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, I put together several iterations of this gathering. As the organization of the workshop has passed to a new generation, I continue to find it to be a leading venue for studying the economic mechanisms through which money, financial markets, contracts, and institutions affect economic activity and economic welfare. Past participants have advanced modern money and banking theory, bringing new insights to real-world economic problems and policy analysis. Numerous research papers presented in these workshops have been published in prestigious economics journals and influenced scholarship in this area. If I had to describe the work that has been presented at this conference over the last 20-plus years, I would say it focuses on the economics of exchange and payment. Walrasian supply and demand models describe how an equilibrium quantity and price are determined but it is silent on two key questions: how do the goods get from seller to buyer and how is payment made from buyer to seller? In short, standard supply and demand analyses have nothing to say about the actual exchange process and how payment is made—in a sense, exchange and payment are viewed as trivial issues. By delving into the micro-foundations of exchange and payment, researchers in this area were able to identify key frictions that make exchange and payment far from trivial. This is not just a theoretical issue that is only relevant to economists in ivory towers. Payments and the exchange process are multibillion-dollar businesses and private sector firms are constantly innovating in this area to overcome the types of frictions that are well-known to this group. The knowledge that I have gained from interacting with researchers in this area for the last 20 years has aided me in one of my roles as a Federal Reserve governor, supporting the Fed's oversight of the U.S. payment system. It also guides my thinking about how to make global payments cheaper and faster, which is a key objective adopted by the G20 countries in 2020 and is one fully supported by the Federal Reserve. Keeping with the tradition of studying exchange and payment, several papers to be presented this year focus on how frictions in financial markets, such as asymmetric information or asset illiquidity, matter for the transmission and implementation of monetary policy as well as unemployment and inflation. Similarly, it is great to continue seeing work studying frictional intermediation in asset markets and the implications for asset prices and the efficient sharing of risk. These contributions push the frontier of our knowledge, facilitate our understanding of real-world complexities, and inform policy thinking. The workshop's focus on broader financial stability issues is also very important. Financial stability vulnerabilities, such as run risk, excessive leverage, and bubbly valuations, could amplify the effect of adverse shocks, potentially resulting in big economic losses and a slowdown in economic activity. Understanding the mechanisms that allow these vulnerabilities to grow and transmit stress to the rest of the financial system requires rigorous theoretical research and solid micro-foundations. Over the course of this week, we will hear interesting work on this topic that includes research questions such as how a central bank can balance interventions for financial stability and interventions to achieve a certain stance of monetary policy, how banks take risks, and understanding the risk of runs on banks, non-banks, and stablecoins. Other concepts are newer and more novel. As the monetary and financial ecosystem has evolved, so has this workshop, bringing together many perspectives and modeling approaches to money and banking theory and its applications. One recurring theme has been to pay special attention to micro-foundations and institutional details, which is important to rigorously analyze and understand today's financial innovations and evaluate their implications for welfare and policy. This year's workshop continues in that innovative spirit, keeping an eye on the future of money and banking. The papers to be presented span areas including decentralized ledgers, exchanges for crypto assets, and the impact of certain protocols on financial stability. Researching these new technologies helps us deepen our understanding of the implications for the broader financial system. An important point to remember this week is that no single field of study can give the answers to all of the big questions we face relating to the evolution of money and banking. Commingling of insights and techniques from monetary theory, finance theory, and other fields is vital in studying the complex interactions of modern financial systems. Of course, it is also important to test our theories with available data, and many papers we will see this week deliver on that count as well. Without further ado, let's get started. I hope you have a great week of engaging discussions, and I'm sure we will learn a lot from this year's workshop. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Alaska Bankers Association, Anchorage, Alaska Good morning. It is really a pleasure to join you here in Alaska.1Getting outside of Washington, D.C. and hearing about the unique issues that affect Alaskans provides valuable insights that inform my work at the Federal Reserve. A part of the mission of the Federal Reserve is to support an economy that works for everyone. Consumers and communities are more successful when they have access to financial products and services that meet their needs. While many of these products and services are available online, as Alaskans know better than most Americans, geography and location are also important. This access often looks very different in places with many remote and rural communities. Today, I will discuss the Federal Reserve's work to promote a more inclusive financial system, including our work on financial inclusion for Indigenous communities. Before diving into those topics, I will share my current views on the economy and monetary policy. Economic and Monetary Policy OutlookOver the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our July meeting, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. After seeing considerable progress last year, in recent months we have seen some further progress on lowering inflation. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which I prefer to the more volatile higher-frequency readings, have moved down since April, although they have remained somewhat elevated at 2.5 percent and 2.6 percent in June, respectively. In addition, the latest consumer and producer price index reports indicate that 12-month core PCE inflation likely remained a bit above 2.5 percent in July. The progress in lowering inflation since April is a welcome development, but inflation is still uncomfortably above the Committee's 2 percent goal. Prices continue to be much higher than before the pandemic, which continues to weigh on consumer sentiment. Inflation has hit lower-income households hardest, since food, energy, and housing services price increases far outpaced overall inflation over the past few years. Economic activity moderated in the first half of this year after increasing at a strong pace last year. Private domestic final purchases (PDFP) growth was solid and slowed much less than gross domestic product (GDP), as the slowdown in GDP growth was partly driven by volatile categories such as net exports, suggesting that underlying economic growth was stronger than GDP indicated. Unusually strong consumer goods spending last year softened in the first quarter of this year, largely accounting for the step-down in PDFP growth. Goods spending rebounded in the second quarter and retail sales continued to rise at a solid pace in July. Consumers appear to be pulling back on discretionary items and expenses, as evidenced in part by a decline in restaurant spending since late last year. Low- and moderate-income consumers no longer have savings to support this type of spending, and we've seen a normalization of loan delinquency rates as they have risen from historically low levels during the pandemic. The labor market continues to loosen, as the number of available workers has increased and the number of available jobs has declined—signs that illustrate the labor market is coming into better balance. After slowing in the second quarter, payroll employment gains eased to a more modest pace in July, even as job openings are being filled by the increased immigrant labor supply. The latest labor market report shows that the unemployment rate stood at 4.3 percent in July. Although notably higher than a year ago, this is still a historically low unemployment rate. In addition, the ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers has declined to its pre-pandemic level. We are also seeing a slowing in wage growth, which now stands at just under 4 percent as measured by the employment cost index. However, given trend productivity, wage gains remain above the pace consistent with our inflation goal. My baseline outlook is that inflation will decline further with the current stance of monetary policy. Should the incoming data continue to show that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will become appropriate to gradually lower the federal funds rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive on economic activity and employment. But we need to be patient and avoid undermining continued progress on lowering inflation by overreacting to any single data point. Instead, we must view the data in their totality as the risks to the Committee's employment and price-stability mandates continue to move into better balance. That said, I still see some upside risks to inflation as supply conditions have now largely normalized and any further improvements to supply seem less likely to offset price pressures arising from increasing geopolitical tensions, additional fiscal stimulus, and increased demand for housing due to immigration. There are also risks that the labor market has not been as strong as the payroll data have been indicating, and it appears that the recent rise in unemployment may be exaggerating the degree of cooling in labor markets. The Q4 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) report suggests that job gains have been consistently overstated in the establishment survey since March of last year, while the household survey unemployment data have become less accurate as response rates have appreciably declined since the pandemic.2The rise in the unemployment rate this year largely reflects weaker hiring, as job searchers entering the labor force are taking longer to find work, and layoffs remain low. It is also likely that some temporary factors contributed to the soft July employment report. The rise in the unemployment rate in July was largely accounted for by workers who are experiencing a temporary layoff and are more likely to be rehired in coming months. Hurricane Beryl also likely contributed to weaker job gains, as the number of workers not working due to bad weather increased significantly last month. In light of upside risks to inflation and uncertainty regarding labor market conditions and the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. Increased measurement challenges and the frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the current state of the economy and predicting how it will evolve even more challenging. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering adjustments to the current stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. In my view, we should consider a range of possible scenarios that could unfold when assessing how the FOMC's monetary policy decisions may evolve. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook and guided by the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. By the time of our September meeting, we will have seen additional economic data and information, including one employment and one inflation report. We will also monitor how developments in broader financial conditions might influence the economic outlook. I will continue to closely watch the data and visit with a broad range of contacts as I assess economic conditions and the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance. As I noted earlier, I continue to view inflation as somewhat elevated. And with some upside risks to inflation, I still see the need to pay close attention to the price-stability side of our mandate while watching for risks of a material weakening in the labor market. My view continues to be that restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Focus on Financial InclusionI will turn now to discuss our work to promote financial inclusion. An inclusive financial system enables access to financial services that enhance the financial well-being of consumers and businesses. Consumers come from a wide range of economic circumstances, with varied perceptions of and experiences with the banking system and different financial needs. All consumers should have access to the financial services and products they need. The U.S. economy benefits when more households achieve financial stability. Yet, while we have made significant progress in expanding access to financial services and deposit accounts in the United States, the remaining challenges often include geographic location, products that meet specific customer needs, the absence of financial literacy education, lack of access to technology and reliable internet, and in some cases, language. These challenges are even more acute in providing access to financial services to Indigenous populations like those here in Alaska. It is impressive to see that many financial services providers, including banks and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), are working to address these challenges and making significant inroads. Importance of banks in furthering financial inclusionThe U.S. financial system is uniquely positioned to bring consumers into the financial mainstream by providing innovative solutions to meet the credit needs of their communities. Banks and other depository institutions assist consumers and small businesses by providing financial products and services that are safe, fair, and responsive. In doing so, they serve a critical role in connecting consumers to the financial system and to the economy. Smaller banks, including community banks, are indispensable in providing access to financial products and services, especially in more remote or rural areas. Here, in Alaska, your banks are the front-line providers for your communities. As you know well, community banks support small businesses through credit and technical assistance and targeted support specific to customers in their communities. As a former community banker, I know firsthand that smaller banks deeply understand their communities because they live in the local economy and know their customers well. This was especially apparent during the COVID pandemic. Community banks rose to the challenge and continued to support the needs of their customers and communities. One of the programs first made available in response to the pandemic was the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which was geared to small businesses and was necessarily dependent on community banks. The PPP was timely and effective in helping millions of businesses weather the initial phase of the pandemic, and community banks were absolutely essential to the success of the program.3 This successful outcome is probably not surprising to this audience, because when it comes to lending to small businesses, community banks have always been an outsized source of credit, relative to their size in the banking system. Before the pandemic, community banks accounted for over 40 percent of all small business lending, while they only accounted for roughly 15 percent of total assets in the banking system.4This trend has continued. An analysis of June 2023 call report data showed that community banks had larger shares of small-business loans relative to their total assets than larger institutions.5 Community banks know their customers, and they know their communities. During that challenging time, community bank CEOs told me that early in the pandemic they directly contacted every single one of their business and consumer loan customers. They took the time to check in with each one to see how they were doing, and what they needed. They encouraged customers to keep in touch with the bank, and they noted the available opportunities for payment deferrals and other options that customers might not have been aware of. Because of this relationship banking model, small banks were and continue to be able to provide more tailored financial products and services that are designed to meet the specific needs of their customers.6 We all recognize the important role of small banks in the functioning of the U.S. economy by supporting the financial needs of their customers and communities. The Federal Reserve relies on insights from community banks and created a mechanism to formalize the views and feedback from community banks on a regular basis through our Reserve Bank and Board Community Depository Institutions Advisory Councils (CDIAC). The Board CDIAC includes a representative from each of the local advisory councils at the 12 Reserve Banks. CDIAC members are bankers from community banks, thrifts, and credit unions who provide insight and information about the economy, lending conditions, and other issues that they see firsthand in their communities. This perspective helps us gain insights into economic activity and the impact of our policies on rural and underserved communities. Central Bank Network for Indigenous InclusionI will turn now to highlight our efforts in providing broader access to financial services. In 2021, the Federal Reserve became a member of the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion (CBNII).7This group brings together the central banks of the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia. The network enabled us to initiate an ongoing international dialogue to raise awareness of economic and financial issues in Indigenous populations. This allows us to share knowledge and best practices, promote engagement and education, and work together with Indigenous communities. As the Federal Reserve's representative to the network, I have prioritized expanding our outreach and engagement efforts to include all U.S. Native populations, Native Alaskan, Native Hawaiian, and Native American. Coming here to Alaska is a key part of this role to ensure that the Federal Reserve continues to expand our firsthand knowledge and understanding of the issues and barriers that may prevent full engagement in the economy. I take these responsibilities seriously and have made meeting with and learning from Indigenous groups and leaders a priority in my work. In October 2021, I met with Native American leaders in South Dakota and on the Pine Ridge Reservation. These tribal leaders highlighted the importance of building understanding by meeting with people in their communities to enhance our knowledge of their social and economic circumstances. Earlier this year and last year, I met with members of the Native Hawaiian community and a range of community organizations to learn about the issues and challenges they face, in addition to the recovery efforts following the devastating wildfire in Lahaina. And yesterday, I met with Native Alaskan leaders to learn about Alaska Native corporations and other initiatives here in Alaska. These convenings and conversations help to inform our work at the Federal Reserve to ensure that the financial system is accessible to everyone, including Indigenous communities. The Fed's work in this area is supported by many of our Reserve Bank teams, including the San Francisco Reserve Bank, the Minneapolis Center for Indian Country Development, and the St. Louis Native Economic and Financial Education Empowerment program. Together, these teams and programs support Indigenous organizations and tribal nations by providing actionable data and research, economic and personal finance education, and other resources to advance opportunities for prosperity in Indigenous communities. We know that the economic well-being of all Americans is an important aspect of the Federal Reserve's goal to increase economic inclusion, and it is one of the reasons we began participating in the CBNII. Even with all of its tools, the Federal Reserve cannot fully succeed until all Americans, including our Native populations and those existing on the margins of the economy, have the opportunity to fully participate. Engagement in these learning opportunities, including these meetings, will help to advance this goal. Mission-driven organizationsFinally, I would like to briefly address the Federal Reserve's efforts to build the institutional capacity of another set of key stakeholders: Minority Depository Institutions, Women-Owned Depository Institutions, and CDFIs, whose missions are to reach historically underserved populations. Providing support for these institutions is an important part of the Federal Reserve's responsibility to provide a safe, sound, and accessible banking system that protects consumers.8 These mission-driven banks and CDFIs are often vital sources of capital to many underrepresented small businesses. CDFIs generally target specific underserved markets. For example, there are many Native CDFIs, including several here in Alaska, that support Native communities by providing access to credit, capital, and financial services.9While there has been some significant growth in Native CDFIs,10they cannot singlehandedly resolve the credit needs of this population. This effort will require partnerships with banks, state and local governments, and community stakeholders. As an example, the Federal Reserve convened a small business lending working group that brought together local, state, and federal partners to address challenges with access to capital for Alaskan small businesses, especially those owned by Native Alaskans.11This group has helped connect local Native CDFIs to banks and state and federal partners for funding and technical assistance. Finally, I will close with a brief note on the revisions to the CDFI Certification Application recently released by the Treasury's CDFI Fund.12There are significant benefits to being a certified CDFI, including access to federal, state, and local governmental funds, philanthropic support, and private sector investment. While the certification process is overseen by the CDFI Fund, I encourage CDFI banks to review the new certification application and share feedback on whether the requirements are attainable and remain compatible with the bank's existing business model. Closing ThoughtsIn closing, thank you again for welcoming me here today. I am very pleased to have the opportunity to learn from your experiences and incorporate these lessons into our work. The unique challenges that you face here in Alaska will help to inform and expand the Federal Reserve's understanding of how we can make the financial system more inclusive. Our meetings over the past few days with state government officials, Native Alaskan leaders, small business owners, and financial institutions provide many different perspectives to help inform our work to achieve an economy that works for everyone. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. The Q4 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) administrative data show employment gains that are about 110,000 per month lower than what the Current Employment Statistics (CES) survey reported from March 2023 to December 2023. Although the Bureau of Labor Statistics benchmarks CES payroll employment based on the Q1 QCEW, to be released on August 21, the Q4 QCEW data point to a substantial downward revision to CES employment gains last year.Return to text 3. Allen N. Berger, Maryann P. Feldman, W. Scott Langford, and Raluca A. Roman, "Let Us Put Our Moneys Together: Minority-Owned Banks and Resilience to Crises (PDF)," WP-2313 (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, June 2023).Return to text 4. Governor Michelle W. Bowman, "Community Banks Rise to the Challenge" (speech at the Community Banking in the 21st Century Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, September 30, 2020).Return to text 5. See Eldar Beiseitov, "Small Banks, Big Impact: Community Banks and Their Role in Small Business Lending," October 20, 2023.Return to text 6. Governor Michelle W. Bowman, "The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in Banking Reforms" (speech at the 2023 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 4, 2023).Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Announces It Has Joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion, Which Will Foster Ongoing Dialogue, Research, and Education to Raise Awareness of Economic and Financial Issues and Opportunities around Indigenous Economies," news release, October 13, 2021.Return to text 8. See the Federal Reserve's Partnership for Progress website athttps://www.fedpartnership.gov.Return to text 9. Seehttps://www.cdfifund.gov/programs-training/programs/native-initiatives.Return to text 10. Seehttps://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2024/native-cdfis-connect-indian-country-to-credit-and-capital.Return to text 11. Governor Michelle W. Bowman,panel remarks at the 2023 Symposium on Indigenous Inclusion, Te Pūtea Matua, Auckland, New Zealand, September 27, 2023.Return to text 12. Seehttps://www.cdfifund.gov/news/553.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At “Reassessing the Effectiveness and Transmission of Monetary Policy,” an economic symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming Four and a half years after COVID-19's arrival, the worst of the pandemic-related economic distortions are fading. Inflation has declined significantly. The labor market is no longer overheated, and conditions are now less tight than those that prevailed before the pandemic. Supply constraints have normalized. And the balance of the risks to our two mandates has changed. Our objective has been to restore price stability while maintaining a strong labor market, avoiding the sharp increases in unemployment that characterized earlier disinflationary episodes when inflation expectations were less well anchored. While the task is not complete, we have made a good deal of progress toward that outcome. Today, I will begin by addressing the current economic situation and the path ahead for monetary policy. I will then turn to a discussion of economic events since the pandemic arrived, exploring why inflation rose to levels not seen in a generation, and why it has fallen so much while unemployment has remained low. Near-Term Outlook for PolicyLet's begin with the current situation and the near-term outlook for policy. For much of the past three years, inflation ran well above our 2 percent goal, and labor market conditions were extremely tight. The Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) primary focus has been on bringing down inflation, and appropriately so. Prior to this episode, most Americans alive today had not experienced the pain of high inflation for a sustained period. Inflation brought substantial hardship, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. High inflation triggered stress and a sense of unfairness that linger today.1 Our restrictive monetary policy helped restore balance between aggregate supply and demand, easing inflationary pressures and ensuring that inflation expectations remained well anchored. Inflation is now much closer to our objective, with prices having risen 2.5 percent over the past 12 months (figure 1).2After a pause earlier this year, progress toward our 2 percent objective has resumed. My confidence has grown that inflation is on a sustainable path back to 2 percent. Turning to employment, in the years just prior to the pandemic, we saw the significant benefits to society that can come from a long period of strong labor market conditions: low unemployment, high participation, historically low racial employment gaps, and, with inflation low and stable, healthy real wage gains that were increasingly concentrated among those with lower incomes.3 Today, the labor market has cooled considerably from its formerly overheated state. The unemployment rate began to rise over a year ago and is now at 4.3 percent—still low by historical standards, but almost a full percentage point above its level in early 2023 (figure 2). Most of that increase has come over the past six months. So far, rising unemployment has not been the result of elevated layoffs, as is typically the case in an economic downturn. Rather, the increase mainly reflects a substantial increase in the supply of workers and a slowdown from the previously frantic pace of hiring. Even so, the cooling in labor market conditions is unmistakable. Job gains remain solid but have slowed this year.4Job vacancies have fallen, and the ratio of vacancies to unemployment has returned to its pre-pandemic range. The hiring and quits rates are now below the levels that prevailed in 2018 and 2019. Nominal wage gains have moderated. All told, labor market conditions are now less tight than just before the pandemic in 2019—a year when inflation ran below 2 percent. It seems unlikely that the labor market will be a source of elevated inflationary pressures anytime soon. We do not seek or welcome further cooling in labor market conditions. Overall, the economy continues to grow at a solid pace. But the inflation and labor market data show an evolving situation. The upside risks to inflation have diminished. And the downside risks to employment have increased. As we highlighted in our last FOMC statement, we are attentive to the risks to both sides of our dual mandate. The time has come for policy to adjust. The direction of travel is clear, and the timing and pace of rate cuts will depend on incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We will do everything we can to support a strong labor market as we make further progress toward price stability. With an appropriate dialing back of policy restraint, there is good reason to think that the economy will get back to 2 percent inflation while maintaining a strong labor market. The current level of our policy rate gives us ample room to respond to any risks we may face, including the risk of unwelcome further weakening in labor market conditions. The Rise and Fall of InflationLet's now turn to the questions of why inflation rose, and why it has fallen so significantly even as unemployment has remained low. There is a growing body of research on these questions, and this is a good time for this discussion.5It is, of course, too soon to make definitive assessments. This period will be analyzed and debated long after we are gone. The arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic led quickly to shutdowns in economies around the world. It was a time of radical uncertainty and severe downside risks. As so often happens in times of crisis, Americans adapted and innovated. Governments responded with extraordinary force, especially in the U.S. Congress unanimously passed the CARES Act. At the Fed, we used our powers to an unprecedented extent to stabilize the financial system and help stave off an economic depression. After a historically deep but brief recession, in mid-2020 the economy began to grow again. As the risks of a severe, extended downturn receded, and as the economy reopened, we faced the risk of replaying the painfully slow recovery that followed the Global Financial Crisis. Congress delivered substantial additional fiscal support in late 2020 and again in early 2021. Spending recovered strongly in the first half of 2021. The ongoing pandemic shaped the pattern of the recovery. Lingering concerns over COVID weighed on spending on in-person services. But pent-up demand, stimulative policies, pandemic changes in work and leisure practices, and the additional savings associated with constrained services spending all contributed to a historic surge in consumer spending on goods. The pandemic also wreaked havoc on supply conditions. Eight million people left the workforce at its onset, and the size of the labor force was still 4 million below its pre-pandemic level in early 2021. The labor force would not return to its pre-pandemic trend until mid-2023 (figure 3).6Supply chains were snarled by a combination of lost workers, disrupted international trade linkages, and tectonic shifts in the composition and level of demand (figure 4). Clearly, this was nothing like the slow recovery after the Global Financial Crisis. Enter inflation. After running below target through 2020, inflation spiked in March and April 2021. The initial burst of inflation was concentrated rather than broad based, with extremely large price increases for goods in short supply, such as motor vehicles. My colleagues and I judged at the outset that these pandemic-related factors would not be persistent and, thus, that the sudden rise in inflation was likely to pass through fairly quickly without the need for a monetary policy response—in short, that the inflation would be transitory. Standard thinking has long been that, as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored, it can be appropriate for central banks to look through a temporary rise in inflation.7 The good ship Transitory was a crowded one, with most mainstream analysts and advanced-economy central bankers on board.8The common expectation was that supply conditions would improve reasonably quickly, that the rapid recovery in demand would run its course, and that demand would rotate back from goods to services, bringing inflation down. For a time, the data were consistent with the transitory hypothesis. Monthly readings for core inflation declined every month from April to September 2021, although progress came slower than expected (figure 5). The case began to weaken around midyear, as was reflected in our communications. Beginning in October, the data turned hard against the transitory hypothesis.9Inflation rose and broadened out from goods into services. It became clear that the high inflation was not transitory, and that it would require a strong policy response if inflation expectations were to remain well anchored. We recognized that and pivoted beginning in November. Financial conditions began to tighten. After phasing out our asset purchases, we lifted off in March 2022. By early 2022, headline inflation exceeded 6 percent, with core inflation above 5 percent. New supply shocks appeared. Russia's invasion of Ukraine led to a sharp increase in energy and commodity prices. The improvements in supply conditions and rotation in demand from goods to services were taking much longer than expected, in part due to further COVID waves in the U.S.10And COVID continued to disrupt production globally, including through new and extended lockdowns in China.11 High rates of inflation were a global phenomenon, reflecting common experiences: rapid increases in the demand for goods, strained supply chains, tight labor markets, and sharp hikes in commodity prices.12The global nature of inflation was unlike any period since the 1970s. Back then, high inflation became entrenched—an outcome we were utterly committed to avoiding. By mid-2022, the labor market was extremely tight, with employment increasing by over 6-1/2 million from the middle of 2021. This increase in labor demand was met, in part, by workers rejoining the labor force as health concerns began to fade. But labor supply remained constrained, and, in the summer of 2022, labor force participation remained well below pre-pandemic levels. There were nearly twice as many job openings as unemployed persons from March 2022 through the end of the year, signaling a severe labor shortage (figure 6).13Inflation peaked at 7.1 percent in June 2022. At this podium two years ago, I discussed the possibility that addressing inflation could bring some pain in the form of higher unemployment and slower growth. Some argued that getting inflation under control would require a recession and a lengthy period of high unemployment.14I expressed our unconditional commitment to fully restoring price stability and to keeping at it until the job is done. The FOMC did not flinch from carrying out our responsibilities, and our actions forcefully demonstrated our commitment to restoring price stability. We raised our policy rate by 425 basis points in 2022 and another 100 basis points in 2023. We have held our policy rate at its current restrictive level since July 2023 (figure 7). The summer of 2022 proved to be the peak of inflation. The 4-1/2 percentage point decline in inflation from its peak two years ago has occurred in a context of low unemployment—a welcome and historically unusual result. How did inflation fall without a sharp rise in unemployment above its estimated natural rate? Pandemic-related distortions to supply and demand, as well as severe shocks to energy and commodity markets, were important drivers of high inflation, and their reversal has been a key part of the story of its decline. The unwinding of these factors took much longer than expected but ultimately played a large role in the subsequent disinflation. Our restrictive monetary policy contributed to a moderation in aggregate demand, which combined with improvements in aggregate supply to reduce inflationary pressures while allowing growth to continue at a healthy pace. As labor demand also moderated, the historically high level of vacancies relative to unemployment has normalized primarily through a decline in vacancies, without sizable and disruptive layoffs, bringing the labor market to a state where it is no longer a source of inflationary pressures. A word on the critical importance of inflation expectations. Standard economic models have long reflected the view that inflation will return to its objective when product and labor markets are balanced—without the need for economic slack—so long as inflation expectations are anchored at our objective. That's what the models said, but the stability of longer-run inflation expectations since the 2000s had not been tested by a persistent burst of high inflation. It was far from assured that the inflation anchor would hold. Concerns over de-anchoring contributed to the view that disinflation would require slack in the economy and specifically in the labor market. An important takeaway from recent experience is that anchored inflation expectations, reinforced by vigorous central bank actions, can facilitate disinflation without the need for slack. This narrative attributes much of the increase in inflation to an extraordinary collision between overheated and temporarily distorted demand and constrained supply. While researchers differ in their approaches and, to some extent, in their conclusions, a consensus seems to be emerging, which I see as attributing most of the rise in inflation to this collision.15All told, the healing from pandemic distortions, our efforts to moderate aggregate demand, and the anchoring of expectations have worked together to put inflation on what increasingly appears to be a sustainable path to our 2 percent objective. Disinflation while preserving labor market strength is only possible with anchored inflation expectations, which reflect the public's confidence that the central bank will bring about 2 percent inflation over time. That confidence has been built over decades and reinforced by our actions. That is my assessment of events. Your mileage may vary. ConclusionLet me wrap up by emphasizing that the pandemic economy has proved to be unlike any other, and that there remains much to be learned from this extraordinary period. Our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy emphasizes our commitment to reviewing our principles and making appropriate adjustments through a thorough public review every five years. As we begin this process later this year, we will be open to criticism and new ideas, while preserving the strengths of our framework. The limits of our knowledge—so clearly evident during the pandemic—demand humility and a questioning spirit focused on learning lessons from the past and applying them flexibly to our current challenges. ReferencesAaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-072. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Bai, Xiwen, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Yiliang Li, and Francesco Zanetti (2024). "The Causal Effects of Global Supply Chain Disruptions on Macroeconomic Outcomes: Evidence and Theory," NBER Working Paper Series 32098. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Ball, Laurence, Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra (2022). "Understanding US Inflation during the COVID-19 Era,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 1–54. Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Gauti B. Eggertsson (2023). "It's Baaack: The Surge in Inflation in the 2020s and the Return of the Non-Linear Phillips Curve," NBER Working Paper Series 31197. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. ——— (2024). "Insights from the 2020s Inflation Surge: A Tale of Two Curves," paper presented at "Reassessing the Effectiveness and Transmission of Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22–24. Binetti, Alberto, Francesco Nuzzi, and Stefanie Stantcheva (2024). "People's Understanding of Inflation," NBER Working Paper Series 32497. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Blanchard, Olivier. J., and Ben S. Bernanke (2023). "What Caused the US Pandemic-Era Inflation?" NBER Working Paper Series 31417. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. ——— (2024). "An Analysis of Pandemic-Era Inflation in 11 Economies," NBER Working Paper Series 32532. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Cascaldi-Garcia. Danilo, Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Michele Modugno (2024). "Lessons from the Co-Movement of Inflation around the World," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 28. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2023). "Managing Disinflations," paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. Clarida, Richard (forthcoming). "A Global Perspective on Post Pandemic Inflation and its Retreat: Remarks Prepared for NBER Conference on 'Inflation in the Covid Era',"Journal of Monetary Economics. Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, and Ayşegül Şahin, (2024). "The Unemployment–Inflation Trade-Off Revisited: The Phillips Curve in COVID Times,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 145, Supplement (July), 103580. Dao, Mai Chi, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra (forthcoming). "Understanding the International Rise and Fall of Inflation since 2020,"Journal of Monetary Economics. di Giovanni, Julian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alvaro Silva, and Muhammed A. Yildirim (2022). "Global Supply Chain Pressures, International Trade, and Inflation," NBER Working Paper Series 30240. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Jaravel, Xavier (2021). "Inflation Inequality: Measurement, Causes, and Policy Implications,"Annual Review of Economics,vol. 13, pp. 599–629. Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). "Inflation at the Household Level,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 91 (November), pp. 19–38. Pfajfar, Damjan, and Fabian Winkler (2024). "Households' Preferences over Inflation and Monetary Policy Tradeoffs," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2024‑036. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Shiller, Robert J. (1997). "Why Do People Dislike Inflation?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13–65. Stantcheva, Stefanie (2024). "Why Do We Dislike Inflation?" NBER Working Paper Series 32300. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. 1. Shiller (1997) and Stantcheva (2024) study why people dislike inflation. Pfafjar and Winkler (2024) study households' attitudes toward inflation and unemployment. Binetti, Nuzzi, and Stantcheva (2024) investigate households' attitudes toward, and understanding of, inflation. Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) and Jaravel (2021) document heterogeneity in the inflation rate experienced by households across the income distribution.Return to text 2. The data for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index is available for June 2024. Over the 12 months to June 2024, the PCE price index increased 2.5 percent. Data for the consumer price index and producer price index are available through July 2024 and can be used to estimate the level of the PCE price index through July. While such an estimate is subject to uncertainty, it suggests that inflation remained near 2.5 percent through July.Return to text 3. Research documenting such benefits include Aaronson and others (2019), who discuss the experience in the 2010s and review related historical evidence.Return to text 4. Payroll employment grew by an average of 170,000 per month over the three months ending in July. On August 21, the Bureau of Labor Statistics released the preliminary estimate of the upcoming annual benchmark revision to the establishment survey data, which will be issued in February 2025. The preliminary estimate indicates a downward adjustment to March 2024 total nonfarm employment of 818,000.Return to text 5. Early examples include Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022) and di Giovanni and others (2022). More recent work includes Benigno and Eggertsson (2023, 2024), Blanchard and Bernanke (2023, 2024), Crump and others (2024), Bai and others (2024), and Dao and others (forthcoming).Return to text 6. The Federal Reserve Board staff's estimate of the labor force makes two adjustments to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' published estimates: (i) reweighing Current Population Survey respondents such that the labor force estimates in all years reflect the Census Bureau's latest vintage of population estimates; and (ii) accounting for net immigration that is likely not fully reflected in the Census Bureau's latest population estimates, as detailed in the CBO's 2024 Demographic Outlook (seehttps://www.cbo.gov/publication/59899). The pre-pandemic trend described here is calculated by appending the CBO's January 2020 projected labor force growth from the start of the pandemic through 2024:Q2 onto the level of the labor force just before the start of the pandemic. (See Congressional Budget Office (2020), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2020 to 2030;https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56073.)Return to text 7. For example, former Chair Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard summarize the standard approach in their work on inflation the following way: "Standard central banking doctrine holds that, so long as inflation expectations are reasonably well anchored, there is a case for 'looking through' temporary supply shocks rather than responding to the short-run increase in inflation" (Blanchard and Bernanke, 2024, p. 2). Clarida (forthcoming) notes how central banks around the world faced a sharp rise in the relative price of goods and chose, at least initially, to accommodate the price pressures with an expected transitory increase in inflation.Return to text 8. In the September 2021 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median projection for headline inflation in 2022 was 2.2 percent. In the August 2021 Survey of Professional Forecasters (the closest survey to the September SEP), the median projection for headline inflation in 2022 was also 2.2 percent. Projections from the Blue Chip survey were similar around this time.Return to text 9. Beginning with the data for October, readings for monthly core PCE jumped to 0.4 percent or higher and inflationary pressures broadened out across goods and services categories. And monthly job gains, already strong, were consistently revised higher over the second half of 2021. Measures of wage inflation also accelerated.Return to text 10. For example, labor supply continued to be materially affected by COVID even after vaccines became broadly available in the U.S. By late 2021, anticipated increases in labor force participation had not yet materialized, likely owing, in part, to the rise of the Delta and Omicron COVID variants.Return to text 11. For example, in March 2022, lockdowns were imposed in the Jilin province, the largest center for auto production. Authorities also ramped up or extended restrictions in manufacturing hubs in the southeast and in Shanghai, where lockdowns had initially been scheduled to end in April 2022.Return to text 12. The global nature of this inflationary episode is emphasized in Cascaldi-Garcia and others (2024) and Clarida (forthcoming), among others.Return to text 13. It has been argued that the natural rate of unemployment had risen, and that the unemployment rate was less informative about tightness in labor market than other measures such as those involving vacancies. For example, see Crump and others (2024). More generally, research has emphasized that the unemployment rate and the ratio of vacancies to unemployment often provide similar signals, but the signals differed in the pandemic period, and the ratio of vacancies to unemployment is a better overall indicator. For example, see Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022) and Benigno and Eggertsson (2023, 2024).Return to text 14. For example, Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022) and Cecchetti and others (2023) present analyses emphasizing that disinflation would require economic slack.Return to text 15. Blanchard and Bernanke (2023) use a traditional (flexible) Phillips curve approach to reach this conclusion for the U.S. Blanchard and Bernanke (2024) and Dao and others (forthcoming) examine a broader set of countries using similar approaches. Di Giovanni and others (2022) and Bai and others (2024) use different techniques and emphasize supply constraints and shocks in the increase in inflation over 2021 and 2022.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2024 CEO and Senior Management Summit and Annual Meeting, sponsored by the Kansas Bankers Association, Colorado Springs, Colorado Thank you for the invitation to join you again this year.1Just as banking and economic conditions continue to evolve, so too do bank regulatory and supervisory standards. I look forward to learning your perspectives on the evolving banking and economic conditions, and the banking agencies' approaches to regulation and supervision. Economic and Monetary Policy OutlookBefore discussing my thoughts on bank regulatory matters, and in light of our recent Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, I will begin by sharing my current views on the economy and monetary policy. Over the past two years, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our July meeting, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5‑1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. After seeing considerable progress last year, we have seen some further progress on lowering inflation in recent months. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which I prefer relative to more volatile higher-frequency readings, have moved down since April, although they have remained somewhat elevated and stood at 2.5 percent and 2.6 percent in June, respectively. The progress in lowering inflation during May and June is a welcome development, but inflation is still uncomfortably above the Committee's 2 percent goal. Despite the recent good data reports, core PCE inflation averaged an annualized 3.4 percent over the first half of the year. And given that supply constraints have now largely normalized, I am not confident that inflation will decline in the same way as in the second half of last year. More importantly, prices continue to be much higher than before the pandemic, which continues to weigh on consumer sentiment. Inflation has hit lower-income households hardest, since food, energy, and housing services price increases far outpaced overall inflation over the past few years. Economic activity moderated in the first half of this year after increasing at a strong pace last year. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth moved up in the second quarter, following a soft reading in the first quarter, while private domestic final purchases (PDFP) increased at a solid pace in both quarters. During the first half of 2024, PDFP slowed much less than GDP, as the slowdown in GDP growth was partly driven by volatile categories such as net exports, suggesting that underlying economic growth was stronger than GDP indicated. Unusually strong consumer goods spending last year softened in the first quarter of this year, largely accounting for the step-down in PDFP growth. Although consumer spending strengthened in the second quarter, consumers appear to be pulling back on discretionary items and expenses, as evidenced in part by a decline in restaurant spending since late last year. Low- and moderate-income consumers no longer have savings to support this type of spending, and we've seen a normalization of loan delinquency rates as they have risen from historically low levels during the pandemic. The labor market continues to loosen, as the number of available workers has increased and the number of available jobs has declined—showing signs that the labor market is coming into better balance. After slowing in the second quarter, payroll employment gains eased to a more modest pace in July, even as job openings are being filled by the increased immigrant labor supply. The latest labor market report shows that the unemployment rate stood at 4.3 percent in July. Although notably higher than a year ago, this is still a historically low unemployment rate. In addition, the ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers has declined to its pre-pandemic level. We are also seeing a slowing in wage growth, which now stands at just under 4 percent as measured by the employment cost index. However, given trend productivity, wage gains are still above the pace consistent with our inflation goal. My baseline outlook is that inflation will decline further with the current stance of monetary policy. Should the incoming data continue to show that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will become appropriate to gradually lower the federal funds rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive on economic activity and employment. But we need to be patient and avoid undermining continued progress on lowering inflation by overreacting to any single data point. Instead, we must view the data in their totality as the risks to the Committee's employment and price-stability mandates continue to move into better balance. That said, I still see some upside risks to inflation. First, as I noted earlier, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements, including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due both to increased labor force participation and strong immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unlikely that further improvements along this margin will continue to lower inflation going forward, as supply chains have largely normalized, the labor force participation rate has leveled off in recent months below pre-pandemic levels, and significantly higher U.S. immigration over the past few years may decrease going forward. Geopolitical developments could also pose upside risks to inflation, as the recent surge in container shipping costs originating in Asia suggest that global supply chains remain susceptible to disruptions, which could put upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices. There is also the risk that additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, impeding further progress on reducing inflation. Finally, there continues to be a risk that the increased immigration could lead to persistently high housing services inflation. Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take time to materialize. There are also risks that the labor market has not been as strong as the payroll data have been indicating, but it also appears that the recent rise in unemployment may be exaggerating the degree of cooling in labor markets. The Q4 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) report implies that job gains have been consistently overstated in the establishment survey since March of last year, while the household survey unemployment data have become less accurate as response rates have appreciably declined since the pandemic.2Moreover, the rise in the unemployment rate this year largely reflects weaker hiring, as job searchers entering the labor force are taking longer to find a job, while layoffs remain low. It is also likely that some temporary factors contributed to the soft July employment report. The rise in the unemployment rate in July was centered in workers experiencing a temporary layoff, who are more likely to be rehired in coming months, and Hurricane Beryl likely contributed to weaker job gains, as the number of workers not working due to bad weather increased significantly last month. In light of upside risks to inflation and uncertainty regarding labor market conditions and the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. Increased measurement challenges and the frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the current state of the economy and predicting how it will evolve even more challenging. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering adjustments to the current stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. In my view, we should consider a range of possible scenarios that could unfold when assessing how the FOMC's monetary policy decisions may evolve. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook, with a focus on the dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. By the time of our September meeting, we will have seen a range of additional economic data and information, including one employment and two inflation reports. We will also have a wider view of how developments in broader financial conditions might influence the economic outlook. In particular, equity prices have been volatile recently but are still higher than at the end of last year. I will continue to closely monitor the data and visit with a broad range of contacts as I assess economic conditions and the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance. As I noted earlier, I continue to view inflation as somewhat elevated. And with some upside risks to inflation, I still see the need to pay close attention to the price-stability side of our mandate while watching for risks of a material weakening in the labor market. My view continues to be that restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run. Banking Regulation and SupervisionI will turn now to bank regulation and supervision. Today I would like to address a few topics that I expect will be of interest to those in this room, starting with the issue of culture both within banks and at bank and other financial regulatory agencies. I will then briefly discuss mergers and acquisitions (M&A) activity in the banking industry, and the current and expected outlook for bank transactions. I will close with a discussion on bank liquidity regulation. The Role of Culture at Banks and at RegulatorsIn recent years, regulatory approaches have included regulators seeking to influence the culture within banks, specifically large banks, focusing on matters like building a culture that promotes compliance or effective risk management, including operational risk. A bank's culture drives its sense of ownership and a collective purpose that is common among many successful organizations, where a bank's board, management, and employees all work together in support of the bank's business purpose and mission. Bank culture can have a strong influence on both business outcomes and on compliance and risk-management outcomes. Bank culture starts with bank leadership, the so-called tone from the top. Strong bank culture demands accountability for bank leadership teams and for the entire workforce. A bank's management is responsible for setting the strategic direction of the company, including which business lines to pursue, expand, or eliminate. But bank leaders also have a responsibility to empower employees to raise issues and concerns, allowing them to identify and escalate emerging business, risk-management, or compliance matters that may require management's attention or intervention. While regulators have sought to influence bank culture over time, ultimately culture is most heavily influenced and shaped by the example set by bank leaders and by the actions of each bank employee. Regulatory agency culture can be similarly impactful in shaping bank regulation and supervision to promote safety and soundness and consumer compliance in an effective and efficient manner. In contrast to regulators, bank management may choose to modify or reshape their mission and objectives over time—evolving their business goals, risk-management policies and processes, and compliance standards as conditions change. For regulators, the overarching regulatory and supervisory mission and related institutional goals are prescribed by statute. While bank regulators lack the flexibility to change the mission, they have significant flexibility in the execution of that mission. This often involves broad policy goals—for example, promoting the safety and soundness of the banking system, and the stability of the financial system. Similar to bank culture, regulatory agency culture begins with its leadership and is then carried out by the individual members of the organization's workforce. Culture plays a significant role in how well bank regulators pursue their statutory objectives and the manner in which they perform the related mission. Have regulators created a culture that allows the staff to identify and escalate issues of concern? Have regulators oriented the mission of the institution around core statutory goals and avoided the temptation to stray from this mission into other matters of public policy? Have regulators created a culture of accountability for leaders and employees, where shortcomings can be fairly identified and actions can be taken to remediate problems? While the value of culture is widely acknowledged, both among banks and among bank regulators, we have seen some recent high-profile examples of culture falling short, and with serious consequences.3Responsible banking involves not only finding and pursuing opportunities to serve customers and grow the business, but also balancing these business priorities with a firm commitment to risk management and compliance, including consumer compliance. While banks are free to pursue growth, in some instances this growth has come without accompanying development of and investment in risk management and legal compliance, to the detriment of the bank and its customers. In the case of Silicon Valley Bank's (SVB) failure in 2023, rapid growth was certainly a factor that contributed to the firm's fragility. The bank's management failed to properly manage its development of contingent liquidity planning, funding, and risk-management capabilities in light of its rapid growth. While this failure revealed problems with bank leadership in promoting a compliance and risk-management culture commensurate with growth, supervisors directly overseeing the bank's expansion were also late to act in the face of emerging firm risks. I think we should question whether we have learned all of the right lessons from SVB's failure. We know that rapid growth is a known risk factor that should result inadditionalsupervisory scrutiny. But some of the post-failure SVB reviews conducted internally by Federal Reserve staff cited rapid growth as a contributing factor for the inadequacy of the supervisory approach.4Among other things, these internal reports suggested that the shift of SVB from one supervisory portfolio to another somehow frustrated appropriate supervision. We need to ask whether supervisors are empowered to appropriately supervise firms that experience rapid growth and other emerging risks. Each regulatory agency has an obligation to facilitate an environment that can help the agency best fulfill its mission. It must take care to maintain a positive and productive culture over time by listening intently to concerns that are raised, ensuring that employees are empowered to raise issues of concern (including reporting of personnel issues), and taking appropriate actions to remediate those concerns. Regulators are certainly not immune from problems arising with institutional culture. Recently, we have seen a high-profile example of problems with the culture at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). I commend the FDIC for engaging an independent third party to assist them in their investigation; this is an important first step toward accountability and addressing these issues. We must not lose sight of the lesson that cultural problems at both banks and regulators can compound cyclical downturns in the banking environment and pose more serious risks to the banking system. Cultivating a positive culture, one that values accountability and the contributions of both management and staff to an organization's mission, can serve as a buffer against future stresses. Bank Mergers and AcquisitionsAnother area of ongoing interest among regulators is the approach to banking industry M&A transactions.5The significant shift in regulatory approaches is concerning. As a threshold matter, any discussion of regulatory approval standards should begin with an understanding of the critical role bank M&A transactions play in a healthy banking system. M&A transactions allow banks to evolve and thrive in our dynamic banking system and can promote their long-term health and viability. M&A also ensures that banks have a meaningful path to transitioning bank ownership. The absence of a viable M&A framework increases the potential for additional risks, including limited opportunities for succession planning, especially in smaller or rural communities, and leaving zombie banks that have no competitive viability or exit strategy to continue operations. The impact of a more restrictive M&A framework affects institutions of all sizes, including larger institutions that are vying to compete with the very largest global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). Banks of all sizes may choose to pursue M&A to pursue strategic growth opportunities and to remain competitive with larger peers that can achieve growth organically through sheer scale. The consequence of limiting the growth options for any bank hoping to compete with the largest G-SIBs has the perverse, and unintended, consequence of actually further insulating the very largest institutions from competition. Against this backdrop, and while recognizing the value of M&A to the banking system, regulators must be pragmatic and thoughtful about reforms. As first steps, we must define the desired end state we are seeking to achieve with any changes. We must then identify the problem that needs to be solved and proffer a solution that is fair, transparent, consistent with applicable statutes, tailored for each bank category, and efficient. We should not propose a cure without first identifying an ailment and a reasoned basis for the prescribed outcome. The primary argument raised by proponents of reform is that the regulatory approval process has become a rubber stamp, one in which regulators do not conduct a meaningful review against the statutory factors laid out by Congress. Bankers who have been through the M&A approval process would almost certainly disagree with the notion that regulators take a light-touch approach in reviewing banking transactions. There is ample evidence to undermine this argument. Let's consider just the process of filing an application. It begins with identifying an M&A target, conducting due diligence, and negotiating the terms of the transaction. The next steps are preparing and filing the application, and engaging with regulators throughout the review process and beyond approval, in anticipation of post-approval business processes, including systems conversions and customer transitions. The costs of M&A can be substantial, and banks do not enter into transactions without significant preparation and planning, including an informed analysis that any proposal would be likely to result in regulatory approval. The demands of the process act as a self-selection mechanism, with only institutions that see both value in the transactionanda strong likelihood of regulatory approval going through the process. This is an expensive and reputationally risky process that bankers and their boards of directors take extremely seriously. Federal Reserve data support the view that even for the self-selected population who files an application, the process does not always lead to approval. To the contrary, based on the most recent data reported for 2023, a significant portion of M&A applications were withdrawn before approval, and the average processing time in the second half of 2023 was 87 days.6The number of approved M&A transactions was also significantly lower in 2023 than it was in 2020, 2021, or 2022.7 When we talk about M&A process reform, it can feel like bankers and regulators are living in different worlds. Bankers seek to conclude the process in a timely way, enabling them to move forward from the uncertainty of the application process to the important work of integrating the banks' operations as quickly as possible. One of the key risks to an effective process is a lack of timely regulatory action. The consequences of delays can significantly harm both the acquiring institution and the target, causing greater operational risk (including the risk of a failed merger), increased expenses, reputational risk, and staff attrition in the face of prolonged uncertainty. In contrast, some regulators feel pressure to revisit well-established regulatory approval standards relating to statutory factors, such as the effect of a transaction on competition, or to even expand the use of M&A review to accomplish other objectives, like forcing banks to adopt regulatory standards that would not otherwise apply by regulation as a condition of approval.8 Regulatory reforms should promote a healthy banking system and must acknowledge the important role M&A activity plays in keeping the system healthy. Unfortunately, reform efforts, and the existing record of performance on banking M&A transactions, show a concerning trend that the barriers to bank M&A activity remain substantial. LiquiditySince last spring, regulators have also focused on revisiting bank liquidity requirements. Last month, the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Atlanta hosted a research conference to discuss the Federal Reserve's traditional role as a "lender of last resort," the payments infrastructure, deposit insurance reform, and the sources of bank liquidity.9The discussions included a broad range of views on all of these topics, highlighting the need for a thorough understanding of all of the issues before moving forward with any proposals for solutions. The failures of SVB, Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank have prompted discussion among policymakers about the need for even more regulation. It's important to emphasize here that the conditions for failure, and the subsequent banking stress, could not have occurred without bank management and supervisory failures. Therefore, identifying and remediating these known and identifiable issues to the greatest extent possible should continue to be a priority as we engage in serious discussions about regulatory reforms. Those events also highlighted the need to revisit bank liquidity and funding as part of our review of the regulatory framework. When we consider the Federal Reserve's operational infrastructure, including Fedwire® and discount window lending, we must ask if the Federal Reserve's tools were effective and complementary to other funding sources (including Federal Home Loan Bank funding) during times of stress, and if not, we must ask how they could be improved. Reform discussions should include not only thinking about new and revised requirements and expectations that would apply to individual banks, but also identifying opportunities to remediate deficiencies and overlapping requirements within the regulatory framework. Lender of Last Resort and Payments Infrastructure One area in need of attention is considering how to operationally enhance and optimize tools like the discount window to meet banking system liquidity needs more effectively. The payments infrastructure that supports bank funding mechanisms must be prepared to operate effectively both during business-as-usual conditions and during stress events. Yet during the banking stress in 2023 and the unprecedented speed of the bank runs that occurred, some banks experienced frictions in using the discount window and limits on the availability of payment services. These issues may have interfered with liquidity management activity and exacerbated the banking stress. The Fed must continue to enhance the technology, operational readiness, and services underpinning discount window loans and payment services to ensure that they are available when needed. On this front, I would note that the Federal Reserve recently published a proposal to expand the operating hours of the Fedwire Funds Service and the National Settlement Service, to operate 22 hours per day, 7 days per week, on a year-round basis.10The proposal also requested feedback on whether the discount window should operate during these same expanded hours. Expanded service hours are a concrete example of a change that is responsive to the issues experienced last spring, but my hope is that these changes are accompanied by other important operational improvements, including improved technology and operational readiness within the Federal Reserve System. Bank Liquidity Bank liquidity has also been a prominent feature in reform discussions, focusing on whether the calibration and scope of the regulatory framework is appropriate. This includes the discussion of possible revisions to liquidity-related regulatory requirements, including liquidity stress testing and the liquidity coverage ratio, as well as shifting supervisory expectations for contingent funding plans and the availability of alternative liquidity sources. As we consider the requirements and expectations for banks, we should also consider the availability of funding and liquidity sources and mechanisms—for example, the role of repo (repurchase agreement) markets and the standing repo facility, extension of credit from the Federal Home Loan Banks, and, of course, the role of the Fed's discount window. While the Federal Reserve considers reforms specifically to the discount window, it is important to frame these discussions within a broader context of other sources, and in light of the unique position of the discount window in this framework. The discount window is a critical tool, but it does not operate in isolation. It is intended to be a source of liquidity as a last resort and at a penalty rate, not as a primary funding resource in the normal course of business at a market rate. In evaluating the bank liquidity framework, it is imperative that we consider and understand the interrelationships among these resources, liquidity requirements and regulations, and bank liquidity planning.11 Some policymakers have stated that a potential response to the 2023 banking stress would be to require banks to preposition collateral at the Fed's discount window, and while policymakers have discussed potentialregulatoryreforms to implement this change,supervisorycommunications have already begun directing collateral prepositioning as a supervisory best practice. As a policy reform, the notion is that forcing banks to preposition collateral in this way will create a ready pool of liquidity those banks can draw from during times of stress. This compulsory requirement to preposition collateral, it is argued, could also mitigate some of the stigma associated with using the discount window and thereby improve its effectiveness. The effectiveness of a prepositioning requirement as a solution to perceived stigma concerns remains to be seen, but one can reasonably question if compulsory prepositioning or compulsory use of the discount window would materially change market perceptions and resolve bank concerns about stigma. There is no reason for a bank to take a loan at a penalty rate or to preposition collateral during periods of calm if the discount window operates effectively and communicates with banks on a regular basis. If the issue is that the window does not operate in an effective manner, requirements to use it more frequently will not address these underlying operational issues. To the contrary, investments must be made to address its operational shortcomings. Some reforms, like encouraging bank readiness to borrow from the discount window if that is part of banks' contingency funding plans, could be explored more thoroughly. If a bank includes the discount window in these plans and intends to use it during stress, the bank should be prepared to do so. But if we are honest, we must recognize that our prior efforts to reduce discount window stigma, as during the COVID period, have not been durable or successful, and that perhaps resources would be better devoted to making sure the discount window is prepared to act in a timely way, rather than adding even more regulatory requirements or supervisory expectations to banks that may complicate day-to-day liquidity management, with uncertain liquidity benefits during stress. When it comes to the next steps in liquidity reform, it is imperative that we tackle known and identified issues that were exposed during the banking stress last year. This must include updating discount window operations and technology and making sure that payment services are available when needed. But for other reforms, a number of important questions remain unanswered, including understanding both where there are frictions and weaknesses in the current bank funding landscape, and what the potential impact (including intended and unintended consequences) of these reforms on the banking industry could be. In my view, remediation of known issues must remain a key priority. Closing ThoughtsThe federal banking agencies' reform agenda has recently been directed toward rapid and transformational change, rather than deliberate and incremental change. Just as a bank's rapid growth may increase the risks of outgrowing risk-management and compliance frameworks, rapid regulatory reforms increase the risk of regulation resulting in harmful unintended consequences to the banking and financial system. Banks are already experiencing the effects of this "rapid change" approach through the supervisory process. And it will become increasingly clear as the reform agenda continues on its current path. Bankers should be concerned about significant swings of the regulatory pendulum, swings that increase financial system uncertainty and instability and that complicate day-to-day operations and long-term planning. Deliberate, thoughtful change allows the Federal Reserve to demonstrate that it executes its duties in an independent manner, focusing on its statutory obligations, and helps build public support and trust. I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. The Q4 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) administrative data show employment gains that are about 110,000 per month lower than what the Current Employment Statistics (CES) survey reported from March 2023 to December 2023. Although the Bureau of Labor Statistics benchmarks CES payroll employment based on the Q1 QCEW, to be released on August 21, the Q4 QCEW data point to a substantial downward revision to CES employment gains last year.Return to text 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Consent Order with Green Dot Bank and Green Dot Corporation (PDF)(July 19, 2024);Consent Order with Silvergate Capital Corporation and Silvergate Bank (PDF)(June 4, 2024);Consent Order with Evolve Bancorp, Inc. and Evolve Bank & Trust (PDF)(June 11, 2024).Return to text 4. See Vice Chair for Supervision Barr, "Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank (PDF)" at 35 (April 28, 2023);Material Loss Review of Silicon Valley Bank (PDF)at 38 (September 25, 2023).Return to text 5. See Jonathan Kanter (2023), "Merger Enforcement Sixty Years after Philadelphia National Bank," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution's Center on Regulation and Markets Event "Promoting Competition in Banking," Washington, June 20; Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2024), "Business Combinations under the Bank Merger Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking," OCC Bulletin 2024-4, January 29; and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2024), "FDIC Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Revisions to Its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions," press release, March 21.Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report, July 1–December 31, 2023 (Washington: Board of Governors, April 2024) Table 2 ("Semiannual Applications Report"). While average processing times in 2023 showed a decrease as compared to 2022, the report notes that this was primarily due to fewer proposals receiving adverse public comments. Semiannual Applications Report, at 3.Return to text 7. Id.Return to text 8. See, e.g., FRB Order No. 2022-22 (October 14, 2022), U.S. Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota,Order Approving the Acquisition of a Bank (PDF);Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman on advance notice of proposed rulemaking on resolution requirements for large Banks and application by U.S. Bancorp(October 14, 2022) (expressing concern about the potential accelerated imposition of regulatory standards on a firm that would not otherwise apply by operation of existing applicability thresholds).Return to text 9. See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, "Exploring Conventional Bank Funding Regimes in an Unconventional World" (July 18-19, 2024, Dallas, Texas).Return to text 10. Federal Reserve System, Request for Comment, "Expansion of Fedwire® Funds Service and National Settlement Service Operating Hours," 89 Fed. Reg. 39,613 (May 9, 2024).Return to text 11. Michelle W. Bowman, "Bank Liquidity, Regulation, and the Fed's Role as Lender of Last Resort" (speech at The Roundtable on the Lender of Last Resort: The 2023 Banking Crisis and COVID, sponsored by the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, Washington, D.C., April 3, 2024).Return to text