Federal bank regulatory agencies today jointly issued an interim final rule that extends the applicability date of certain provisions in their Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) final rule issued in October 2023. The agencies also requested comment on the extension. To promote clarity and consistency, the agencies extended the applicability date of the facility-based assessment areas and public file provisions from April 1, 2024, to January 1, 2026. Therefore, banks will not have to make changes to their assessment areas or their public files as a result of the 2023 CRA final rule until January 1, 2026. This extension aligns these provisions with other substantive parts of the 2023 CRA final rule that are applicable on January 1, 2026. For example, all provisions about where banks are evaluated will now apply on the same date. Comments on the extended applicability date must be received 45 days after the rule is published in theFederal Register. In addition, the agencies also issued technical, non-substantive amendments to the CRA final rule and related agency regulations that reference it. For example, one of these technical amendments clarifies that banks do not need to make changes to their public notices until January 1, 2026. In October 2023, the agencies finalized updates to strengthen and modernize regulations implementing the CRA to better achieve the purposes of the law. The CRA is a landmark law enacted nearly 50 years ago to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of their entire communities, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with banks' safe and sound operation. Federal Registernotice: Community Reinvestment Act; Supplemental Rule Board memo (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
To help facilitate recovery efforts from wildfires in Hawaii last year, four federal financial institution regulatory agencies today temporarily paused certain appraisal requirements for real estate-related transactions in Maui County. This temporary action is expected to allow banks and credit unions to work with families and businesses without obtaining an appraisal. Banks and credit unions will still be required to determine that the value of the real estate supports the institution's decision to enter into the transaction. As a result of this temporary action, financial institutions will be better able to lend or modify loans in areas where wildfire damage has made appraisals challenging to obtain and reduce loan processing times, helping to facilitate recovery from the disaster. This action will expire on August 10, 2026. The agencies will monitor institutions' real estate lending practices to help ensure the transactions are being originated in a safe and sound manner. Federal Registernotice: Temporary Exceptions to FIRREA Appraisal Requirements in Maui County as Affected by Hawaii Wildfires
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the 2024 Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Economic Summit, Stanford University, Stanford, California Thank you, Mark, and thank you for the opportunity to be part of the discussions today.1For more than 40 years, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research has assisted economic policymakers by producing sharp analysis and fostering the kind of constructive dialogue reflected in today's agenda. My topic today is the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices—and, specifically, the tradeoffs that sometimes arise when pursuing these two objectives. I say "sometimes" because there have been times and certain economic conditions in which such tradeoffs did not arise—or at least were not apparent. This distinction is an important one, especially when considering the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)'s recent progress in reducing high inflation while the labor market has remained strong. Better understanding the tradeoffs, or lack thereof, in pursuing the dual mandate will help researchers and policymakers draw lessons from these welcome recent developments. History of the Inflation–Unemployment TradeoffIn 1977, Congress legislated the Federal Reserve's "dual mandate," under which the FOMC is required to pursue both maximum employment and stable prices, with both objectives on an equal footing.2At the outset, it is worth stressing that these goals are generally complementary, and I will return to this point shortly. But when they are not complementary, one way to think of the policy problem is in terms of tradeoffs: Maximum employment is the highest level of employment that will not cause inflation to escalate significantly above levels consistent with price stability. Before going into those tradeoffs, I want to emphasize that achieving the Committee's employment goal on an ongoing basis rests on achieving price stability. Price stability enables long-lasting economic expansions, which strengthen the labor market and expand employment opportunities. This process particularly benefits families and communities that all too often have been left behind.3 But it is appropriate to recognize also that tradeoffs between the goals of maximum employment and price stability can occur in the short term. Indeed, the potential shorter-term tradeoff between unemployment and inflation has long featured prominently among the economic considerations of policymakers. Government action to boost employment through fiscal or monetary stimulus has historically tended to increase aggregate spending and inflation, too. On the contrary, actions to reduce inflation by shifting to contractionary fiscal or monetary policy have tended to slow economic activity and raise unemployment, or at least slow the pace of job creation. The idea of a short-run tradeoff is reflected in the original specification of the "Phillips curve," named after New Zealand economist A.W. Phillips, who plotted historical values of the United Kingdom's unemployment rate and growth in nominal wages between 1861 and 1957, showing an often inverse relationship between the two. Although the Phillips curve was initially specified in terms of wages, later versions have more typically compared unemployment with price inflation. Taken at face value, a tradeoff between keeping employment high and reducing inflation would seem to present policymakers with a dilemma. It suggests that when inflation is well above levels associated with price stability, policymakers must engineer a significant increase in unemployment to bring inflation down. Disinflation can be especially challenging when expectations of future inflation are high.4We saw this in the 1970s and 1980s. Convincing households and businesses that the FOMC was committed to reducing inflation required accepting a protracted, though ultimately temporary, period of high unemployment, as then Fed Chair Paul Volcker came to believe. Volcker is widely credited with ending the "Great Inflation" experienced at the time through his willingness to induce a punishing recession. He lowered inflation and kept it down, in substantial part by convincing the public that the Fed would keep inflation in check whatever the cost, thereby lowering expectations of future inflation.5 While long experience shows that there can be a tradeoff between policy actions to pursue maximum employment and stable prices, there are times and conditions when this is not the case, or at least when there is little evidence of a tradeoff. For example, for most of the decade after the Great Recession, FOMC policy was, by some measures at least, highly accommodative, yet inflation ran consistently below the Committee's 2 percent target. So when inflation is below target and employment is below maximum sustainable levels, accommodative policy can be used to pursue both sides of the mandate. Academic economists have debated for decades about the circumstances in which the tradeoff applies. One strand of the research literature proposes that a central bank can indeed achieve good economic outcomes by focusing on a single mandate, an inflation target, and that policies to promote stable prices can also secure low unemployment. In this view, stabilization of inflation ensures that the economy performs at its optimal level, with firms producing just the right amount such that no resources, including workers, are left on the sidelines. This theory fits in a world in which the economy is driven by demand—in such a case, shocks coming from the demand side of the economy can be offset by monetary policy, which works via aggregate demand.6 But in the real world—which is not so simple—demand shocks are not the only forces that can drive economic fluctuations. Supply shocks not only exist, but they can also be large and persistent, as we have learned over the past several years. Adverse supply shocks, just like higher inflation expectations, make managing the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment more difficult and costly. While a sharp reduction in demand reduces both economic activity and inflation, a sharp reduction in supply, such as a sudden loss of global oil supply, increases inflation and reduces economic activity. Trying to combat inflation by raising interest rates would further reduce economic activity and employment, while reducing interest rates to boost economic activity and employment raises inflation even higher. Therefore, counteracting a persistent supply shock with monetary policy tools may help with one side of the mandate but create even larger deviations from the other side of the mandate. Inflation and Unemployment in the Pandemic and Its AftermathLet me now turn to the pandemic experience. Inflation picked up in 2021, and by mid-2022, 12-month inflation, based on personal consumption expenditures (PCE), hit 7 percent, well above the FOMC's 2 percent target. It was the most significant surge in inflation since the 1970s, prompting fears that it could raise expectations of future inflation and make getting inflation down again require a steep tradeoff—that is, much higher unemployment. One more specific concern was that a so-called wage–price spiral would emerge, as may have been the case for a time in the 1970s. In a tight labor market, expectations of continued high inflation can lead workers trying to maintain their living standards to demand higher raises. In a context of strong aggregate demand, firms will likely grant the wage increases to retain their workers—then pass through the resulting cost increase as higher prices. To avoid a continuing spiral, demand and supply in labor and product markets must be rebalanced—through lower aggregate demand, greater aggregate supply, or both.7If achieving this balance requires a drastic reduction in aggregate demand, then sustainably taming inflation could require a high cost in terms of the employment mandate. Fortunately, we appear to have avoided a wage–price spiral this time, as I will discuss later. As inflation rose and began to appear persistent, the FOMC rightly focused on restoring price stability, knowing that without price stability, the economy would not work for anyone and that high inflation would ultimately undermine the strength of the labor market. While interest rates rose rapidly, some feared that the cost of disinflation would be persistently elevated unemployment. But over the past year or so, that tradeoff has been much less evident than many feared. We have seen inflation cool significantly, falling more rapidly than at any time since the 1980s. Yet unemployment remains near the lowest levels seen only a few times since the 1960s. How have we managed to avoid the familiar tradeoff during this period and see such welcome outcomes on both the inflation and employment fronts? I would propose a few possible reasons. These center on the fact that the pandemic inflation featured both supply and demand shocks. In the limited time that I have today, I don't propose to get into the debate about exactly how much of the recent inflation can be explained by supply as opposed to demand. But I will discuss how both demand and supply forces have been important in the rise and fall in the inflation rate.8 The pandemic caused a significant reduction in supply in some areas of the economy. Limits on the supply of goods resulted from restricted output in many industries. Consider a key U.S. manufacturing industry, auto production. In 2019, the U.S. manufactured 10-1/2 million light vehicles. In 2020, production plunged to 8-1/2 million, with pandemic-related plant shutdowns followed by worldwide shortages of computer chips and other parts.9It has taken the industry a long time to recover—auto production was less than 9 million in 2021 and a bit under 10 million in 2022. Constrained vehicle supply played a big role in boosting auto prices. And it wasn't just motor vehicles; for example, you might recall reports of food processing plant shutdowns, and many other goods-producing industries also suffered from "lost output." U.S. industrial production dropped at the onset of the pandemic and then remained below its pre-pandemic level until early 2022 despite strong demand for physical goods; indeed, evidence shows that output was held down by insufficient supply of materials.10 But supply problems were not limited to goods; indeed, insufficient supply of labor has also been widely cited by businesses as having held down output. Labor supply was suddenly and severely limited early in the pandemic as workers voluntarily and, in some cases, involuntarily stayed out of the workplace. The labor force did not recover to pre-pandemic levels until mid-2022. Older workers, in particular, left the labor market in large numbers. But even many prime-age workers—those between the ages of 25 and 54—withdrew because of school disruptions and health concerns, and prime-age labor force participation remained below its pre-pandemic level until early 2023. A slowdown in immigration, likewise, deprived the economy of a customary source of labor supply growth, as did elevated mortality due to COVID-19.11 Fortunately, these supply shortages for both goods and labor have mostly dissipated. For example, auto production in 2023 nearly regained its 2019 level, and industrial production as well as various goods supply indicators have returned closer to their pre-pandemic levels. Congestion in logistics and transportation networks eased, and firms sometimes found alternative supply chain networks. In the labor market, shortages directly related to the pandemic have eased, helping restore labor force participation, likely in part because of the reopening of schools, progress with the health situation, and help from childcare subsidies and other policies. Increased capabilities for remote work, allowing for a decoupling between firm and worker location, expanded the pool of available workers and jobs. More broadly, strong labor demand has enticed more workers into the labor market to the point that labor force participation among prime-age workers is now above pre-pandemic levels. And immigration has rebounded as well. Another, more subtle source of labor market supply recovery has been improvements in the quality of matches between firms and workers. At any time, a crucial factor that affects labor supply is how well the skills of available workers fulfill the needs of employers. With labor in many sectors in short supply and very high numbers of job openings, many workers quit their jobs to move to new ones. Economists generally believe that increased labor turnover improves worker–firm matches—workers find jobs that make better use of their skills, typically with higher pay, and firms find workers that are better suited for their businesses and are more productive at their jobs. Economic expansions, such as the one that has continued since April 2020, present more opportunities for workers to find a good match.12And it appears that workers and firms were pretty efficient at finding each other over the past couple of years, likely upgrading the average quality of a job match in the process.13Higher-quality job–worker matches improve the productivity of workers, serving like a boost to labor supply. If reductions in supply contributed to inflation, then recovery of that supply would help lower inflation, too. Supply improvements in the goods sector have helped ease inflation starting in early 2022; for example, in January, the 12-month growth of new motor vehicle prices was less than 1 percent, far slower than its peak pace above 13 percent in the spring of 2022. More broadly, the overall price level for core PCE goods, which excludes food and energy, was fairly flat last year and has actually declined in recent months. On the labor side, supply recovery has likely contributed to disinflation by helping to ease the pace of wage growth—especially in the labor-intensive services industries.14For private services as a whole, 12-month nominal wage growth, as measured by average hourly earnings, was 4.5 percent in January, down from its peak of 5.9 percent in early 2022. And, sure enough, price inflation in services has also slowed: In core PCE services—which accounts for roughly three-fourths of core PCE—12-month inflation was 4.1 percent in January, down from its peak of 5.8 percent early last year.15 But supply is not the only factor behind the slowing of inflation. Policies affecting aggregate demand have played a role as well. On the fiscal side, measures of the impact of government spending on economic growth turned negative in 2021 after being strongly supportive in 2020.16And in terms of monetary policy, the FOMC's actions in late 2021 indicated a sooner-than-previously-anticipated start to policy rate increases, with the FOMC beginning to raise the target range for the federal funds rate in March 2022. After that, the Committee tightened its stance of policy expeditiously. The result can be seen especially in areas of the economy that are sensitive to financial conditions. The housing sector saw a significant slowdown, with residential investment declining more than 15 percent in 2022 and remaining flat in 2023. Growth of investment in equipment was tepid last year, likely due in part to restrictive financial conditions, even as we have seen growth in manufacturing construction for semiconductors and electric vehicle batteries that will help address remaining supply-side bottlenecks. Aside from these examples of subdued spending in policy-sensitive sectors, we can also see the imprint of monetary policy in the anchoring of inflation expectations. Even amid high inflation, households, businesses, and financial markets believed that inflation would eventually return to its target pace. These beliefs were guided by the FOMC's actions: By raising policy rates expeditiously and communicating clearly, the Committee demonstrated its resolve to lower inflation to 2 percent and its commitment to the price-stability mandate. Anchored inflation expectations are apparent, for example, in the popular University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. Expectations of inflation for the period covering the next 5 to 10 years have remained relatively stable over the pandemic and close to levels seen before the pandemic. And shorter-term expectations rose in 2021 but have come back down recently.17Anchored inflation expectations likely matter for actual price setting. That is what modern theories of the Phillips curve suggest. And the relevance of that theoretical expectation has been suggested by surveys reported by Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond staff: The data show a close relationship between firms' expectations for overall inflation and those firms' own price-setting plans.18Crucially, by keeping inflation expectations anchored, the FOMC has likely forestalled the development of wage–price spiral dynamics of the kind I mentioned earlier, while also creating conditions in which inflation has been able to peak at a lower rate than would have been the case if the FOMC had not acted with credibility and clear communication. Real wage growth—that is, growth of wages after accounting for inflation—has turned positive, which means workers' income is rising faster than the cost of living. A Couple of Final Observations about the Pandemic and Its AftermathThese developments help bring us back to the inflation–unemployment tradeoff that started my discussion. The pandemic experience has shown that the nature of that tradeoff changes with economic conditions, as does the steepness of the Phillips curve. I will close by making two more general observations about the changes that we have seen during the pandemic and its aftermath, with suggestions about open questions for researchers moving forward. First, supply curves are, as economists say, "convex": Their slope increases sharply after quantity supplied reaches a certain point, such that prices rise quickly. The steep part of the supply curve can come into play when demand nears the limits of an industry's capacity. That could happen either because of an unusually large increase in demand or because of a temporary reduction in industry capacity—or both. Research has shown this is the case for individual industries, even in the pre-pandemic period.19During the pandemic, many industries experienced large demand shocks or supply curtailment that contributed to inflation, as I have already discussed, and those same shocks also may have exacerbated the inflationary effects by pushing many industries up the steep part of their supply curves.20 Early in the pandemic, the convexity or steepness of industry supply curves was quite costly in terms of our inflation mandate. But it has likely helped us more recently as we have apparently moved back down the steep part of the supply curve in many industries, which has allowed for rapid disinflation.21An open question in the longer term is whether this process has helped firms learn more about supply chains and inventory management such that we might even be less likely to encounter the steep part of supply curves in the future. Second, with regard to the Phillips curve specifically, I note that in a large class of economic models, the steepness of the Phillips curve is partly a function of how frequently firms adjust their prices, and that seems to be borne out by recent experience.22Before the pandemic, the typical price tag lasted more than 10 months, and this figure was reasonably stable for many years. But the pandemic seems to have moved firms into a regime of more frequent price adjustment—that is, shorter price duration. By early 2022, the typical price was lasting less than five months. Price adjustment frequency has since slowed back down, with the latest data from the third quarter of last year suggesting prices were lasting nearly seven months.23Continued slowing of price adjustment frequency is an indicator that firms' costs are rising less quickly and the economy is moving back down the Phillips curve.24Interestingly, though, in the workhorse academic models used for studying the effects of monetary policy on the economy, the frequency of price adjustment is often assumed to be constant. Of course, economists have thought about this in the past; but a greater understanding of the relationship between the price adjustment decisions of individual firms and overall inflation is an important area for further academic research.25 For the reasons I have been discussing, I am cautiously optimistic that we will see continued progress on disinflation without significant deterioration of the labor market. With respect to the inflation and unemployment tradeoff, we have certainly learned a lot during the pandemic—but there is still much more to learn. In particular, I look forward to further research that can enrich the economics profession's understanding of the inflation–unemployment tradeoff and the Phillips curve and continue informing policymakers as well. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Before 1977, the Federal Reserve viewed itself as having a dual mandate because it was covered by the Employment Act of 1946, which gave the whole federal government a list of objectives that included maximum employment and maximum "purchasing power." The predominant interpretation of the latter objective was that it corresponded to price stability.Return to text 3. López-Salido, Markowitz, and Nelson (2024) provide a longer-term perspective on how the Federal Reserve has viewed price stability as necessary for achieving maximum employment on a sustained basis. See David López-Salido, Emily Markowitz, and Edward Nelson (2024), "Continuity and Change in the Federal Reserve's Perspective on Price Stability," manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, January.Return to text 4. In the context of achieving disinflation, the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment is sometimes referred to as the "sacrifice ratio." Estimates of the quantitative magnitude of this ratio vary widely, depending on the period being studied and the nature of the macroeconomic model being used. Model-based explorations do suggest that inflation expectations matter for the size of the ratio. For a helpful discussion and analysis, see Robert J. Tetlow (2022), "How Large Is the Output Cost of Disinflation? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-079 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).Return to text 5. See David E. Lindsey, Athanasios Orphanides, and Robert H. Rasche (2005), "The Reform of October 1979: How It Happened and Why," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,Review,vol. 87 (March/April, Part 2), pp. 187-235.Return to text 6. For discussion of the notion that inflation-targeting monetary policy can achieve both stable prices and maximum employment, see Ben S. Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999),Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). More recently, this notion has been called the "divine coincidence" (see Olivier Blanchard and Jordi Galí (2007), "Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 35–65).Return to text 7. For a discussion of wage–price spirals, see Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "The Benefits of Price Stability," speech delivered at the Center for Economic Policy Studies and on the occasion of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., February 24.Return to text 8. Precisely quantifying the relative roles of supply and demand in the pandemic inflation will likely remain a controversial pursuit for some time. One approach is to focus on relative movements of particular prices and of specific output categories in a "bottom up" manner, as illustrated, for example, by Adam Hale Shapiro (2022), "Decomposing Supply and Demand Driven Inflation," working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.An alternative approach is to conduct a "top down" time-series analysis relating aggregate data on wages, prices, labor market tightness, and various measures of goods supply conditions, as illustrated by Olivier J. Blanchard and Ben S. Bernanke (2023), "What Caused the U.S. Pandemic-Era Inflation?" NBER Working Paper Series 31417 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June). The two approaches can complement each other by providing alternative, but mutually consistent, perspectives on the same problem.Return to text 9. The auto industry's experience during the pandemic is a good example of how many industries' production functions are, in economists' terms, "Leontief," meaning that shortages of even one key component can restrict production even if other components are available. The prevalence of this kind of production in many industries made the broader supply chain particularly vulnerable to the extreme pandemic supply shocks. A helpful discussion—which predates the pandemic and focuses on the 2011 Japan earthquake—is Christoph E. Boehm, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2019), "Input Linkages and the Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku Earthquake,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 101 (March), pp. 60–75.Return to text 10. Industrial production was low despite strong demand: New orders indexes from many sources were elevated throughout late 2020 and 2021. The Census Bureau's Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity Utilization features questions on reasons for factory output being below capacity. "Insufficient supply of materials" and "insufficient supply of labor" both surged starting in late 2020 and remained near peak levels from mid-2021 through mid-2022 before starting to move back down. Separately, the Institute for Supply Management's Report on Business Manufacturing PMI (Purchasing Managers Index) features lists of items in short supply each month; the share of major manufacturing-sector input material groups reported as being in short supply surged to about 40 percent during 2021 and has since declined to below 10 percent. For a more formal approach to measuring lost output in manufacturing industries, see Charles Gilbert, Maria D. Tito, and Cynthia Doniger (2021), "Quantifying Bottlenecks in Manufacturing," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 19).Return to text 11. Per data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey, the labor force level among foreign-born workers had a pre-pandemic peak about a year before the pandemic and did not fully recover to this peak until early 2022.Return to text 12. Past research has found that job quality is higher in expansions; see Gadi Barlevy (2002), "The Sullying Effect of Recessions,"Review of Economic Studies,vol. 69 (January), pp. 65–96. In the pandemic specifically, job-to-job flows appear to have featured strong wage growth; see David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023), "The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market," NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November).Return to text 13. There are various ways to measure "matching efficiency." One such measure shows an initial decline in matching efficiency early in the pandemic, followed by a recovery to (roughly) pre-pandemic levels. See Simon Mongey and Jeff Horwich (2023), "Are Job Vacancies Still as Plentiful as They Appear? Implications for the 'Soft Landing,'" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, December 1.Return to text 14. In general, the most labor-intensive sectors (measured as labor costs' share of value added) are mostly services sectors. As of 2022, the labor cost share of value added was 83 percent in education and health services, 75 percent in professional and business services, 64 percent in construction, and 59 percent in leisure and hospitality. See Bureau of Economic Analysis (2023), "Interactive Data," tables on composition of gross output by industry," December.Return to text 15. The connection between wages and prices in services industries has been explored in the economics literature and been found to be a likely contributor to the higher "stickiness" or persistence of services prices relative to goods prices. See Ekaterina Peneva (2011), "Some Evidence on Factor Intensity and Price Rigidity,"Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,vol. 35 (October), pp. 1652–58.Return to text 16. See, for example, the Hutchins Center Fiscal Impact Measure, which estimates the effect of government tax and spending policy on gross domestic product growth. The measure is available on the Brookings Institution's website athttps://www.brookings.edu/articles/hutchins-center-fiscal-impact-measure.Return to text 17. Expected inflation in the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations shows a similar pattern to that seen in the Michigan survey. And expectations appear well anchored in surveys of forecasters and in market-based measures.Return to text 18. See Felipe F. Schwartzman and Sonya Ravindranath Waddell (2024), "Inflation Expectations and Price Setting among Fifth District Firms," Economic Brief 24-03 (Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, January).Return to text 19. See Christoph E. Boehm and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2022), "Convex Supply Curves,"American Economic Review,vol. 112 (December), pp. 3941–69.Return to text 20. For an accessible discussion, see Deepa D. Datta, Laura Feiveson, Ekaterina Peneva, and Gisela Rua (2022), "Bottlenecks, Shortages, and Soaring Prices in the U.S. Economy," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 24).Return to text 21. For a formal treatment of the notion that monetary policy can be particularly effective at lowering inflation without large output losses following supply and capacity issues, see Xiwen Bai, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Yiliang Li, and Francesco Zanetti (2024), "The Causal Effects of Global Supply Chain Disruptions on Macroeconomic Outcomes: Evidence and Theory," working paper, January, available on the University of Pennsylvania website athttps://www.sas.upenn.edu/~jesusfv/Supply_Chain_Disruption.pdf.Return to text 22. In a broad set of models on inaction and action in the face of uncertainty and "non-convex" adjustment costs, firms may choose not to change prices even when faced with shocks, provided the shocks are small. But large shocks move firms out of their "inaction range" such that a series of large shocks can increase adjustment frequency. This can potentially explain reduced price "stickiness" in the pandemic. However, this outcome was not necessarily inevitable, as higher uncertainty can reduce adjustment frequency (due to raising the "real option" value of waiting), and the pandemic environment has been uncertain in many dimensions. For discussions, see Joseph Vavra (2014), "Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Interpretation,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 129 (February), pp. 215–58; and Robert E. Hall (2023), "A Major Shock Makes Prices More Flexible and May Result in a Burst of Inflation or Deflation," NBER Working Paper Series 31025 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).Return to text 23. See updated data from Hugh Montag and Daniel Villar (2023), "Price-Setting during the Covid Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 29).Return to text 24. The previous inflationary episode experienced by the U.S.—during the late 1970s and early 1980s—saw similar dynamics of price adjustment frequency; see Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, Patrick Sun, and Daniel Villar (2018), "The Elusive Costs of Inflation: Price Dispersion during the U.S. Great Inflation,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 133 (November), pp. 1933–80.Return to text 25. I am referring here to the standard "New Keynesian" model, in which firms are allowed to adjust prices only if they receive a random signal whose probability distribution is typically constant and independent of the duration of the firm's current price level (so-called Calvo pricing). Allowing for price adjustment frequency and inflation to move together is one possible way to generate a "nonlinear" Phillips curve; for example, see Andres Blanco, Corina Boar, Callum J. Jones, and Virgiliu Midrigan (2024), "Non-Linear Inflation Dynamics in Menu Cost Economies," NBER Working Paper Series 32094 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January).Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced a final rule that updates risk management requirements for certain systemically important financial market utilities (FMUs) supervised by the Board. FMUs provide essential infrastructure to clear and settle payments and other financial transactions to allow financial markets and the broader economy to function effectively. The final updates provide additional clarity and specificity to existing requirements in four key areas of operational risk management: incident management and notification; business continuity management and planning; third-party risk management; and review and testing of operational risk management measures. For example, the updates explicitly require FMUs to establish an incident management framework and emphasize the need for FMUs to continue to advance their cyber resilience capabilities. The final updates are substantively similar to the proposal and largely consistent with existing measures that FMUs take to comply with the current requirements. FMUs subject to the rule must be in compliance with certain updates by 90 days and all updates by 180 days after publication in theFederal Register. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Financial Market Utilities (PDF) Board memo (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday issued an enforcement action against JPMorgan Chase & Co. and fined the firm approximately $98.2 million for an inadequate program to monitor firm and client trading activities for market misconduct. The Board's action requires JPMorgan Chase to review and take corrective action to address the firm's inadequate monitoring practices, which occurred between 2014 and 2023. The Board's action was taken in coordination with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The penalties announced by the Board and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency total approximately $348.2 million. Also on Thursday, the Board announced the execution of a written agreement with First & Peoples Bancshares, Inc., of Russell, Kentucky, dated March 13, 2024. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the 2023 combined annual audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks. An independent public accounting firm, issued unqualified opinions, asserting that its audit found the financial statements for the Board, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, and 3 limited liability companies (LLCs) to be free of material misstatements in accordance with the applicable auditing standards. Additionally, the Board released individual and combined statements for the Board, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, and 3 LLCs related to lending facilities established to support the Federal Reserve's pandemic response. The audited financial statements provide information about the assets, liabilities, and earnings of the Board, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, and the 3 LLCs as of December 31, 2023. The Board released the 2023 combined preliminary income and expense dataearlier this year. Total assets of the Reserve Banks as of December 31, 2023, were approximately $7.8 trillion, a decrease of $0.7 trillion from the previous year. Total assets were composed primarily of $7.5 trillion of U.S. Treasury securities and federal agency and government-sponsored enterprise mortgage-backed securities acquired through the conduct of monetary policy. Additional information in the audited financial statements of the Reserve Banks includes: The Federal Reserve Act requires the Reserve Banks to remit excess earnings to the U.S. Treasury after providing for operating costs, payments of dividends, and an amount necessary to maintain surplus at the statutory limit. During a period when earnings are not sufficient to provide for those costs, a deferred asset is recorded. In 2023, the deferred asset reported by the Reserve Banks increased by $116.7 billion resulting in a cumulative deferred asset at year-end of $133.3 billion. The deferred asset is the amount of net excess earnings the Reserve Banks will need to realize before their remittances to the U.S. Treasury resume. A deferred asset has no implications for the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy or its ability to meet its financial obligations. The Board engaged KPMG LLP to audit the financial statements of the Reserve Banks and the LLCs in accordance with applicable standards. KPMG LLP also conducted audits of internal controls over financial reporting for the 12 individual Reserve Banks and the Board. Financial statements for the Board, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, and the 3 LLCs are available on the Federal Reserve Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Watch Live Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Board's (Board) engagement with international organizations on supervisory and regulatory matters. The Board participates in various international forums in support of its statutory responsibilities of supervising and regulating financial institutions and fostering financial stability. In a globally interconnected financial system, financial shocks can quickly propagate across national borders, and the Board seeks to promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by supporting strong and consistent minimum regulatory standards and sound supervisory practices for financial institutions globally. Engagement with international organizations also has been an effective and efficient means for understanding and sharing information on global financial risks, as well as an opportunity for the Board to help shape international standards and recommendations to the nature and needs of the U.S. financial system. It is also important to note that these standards and recommendations are not binding on any jurisdiction or member, including the United States and the Federal Reserve. Any changes to the regulations that apply to U.S. firms would be proposed by the Federal Reserve and go through our usual public notice and comment process. In support of its goal to enhance the strength, stability, and resilience of the financial system, the Board actively participates in the following supervision and regulation-focused standard-setting bodies: In addition, the Board is represented at the staff level on the working groups of these organizations. The Board is also a member of the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). Although the NGFS is not a standard-setting body, Board staff participate in its working groups to understand how other central banks are approaching climate-related financial risks. Each international group that we participate in has a unique organizational structure and purpose and holds regular meetings. The nature of the Board's participation varies accordingly by group. The Board promotes U.S. interests by participating in the main groups and subgroups and has leadership roles on major issues. As part of this work, we coordinate with other U.S. participants, such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Department of the Treasury, the Federal Insurance Office, and state insurance commissioners. These international groups are consensus-driven organizations—participants seek to reach a common understanding around material issues and consider what policy choices could help to address those issues. Although it can be challenging to work through complex issues, this approach serves as a check on potentially undesirable policy recommendations. As with any other process, alternative viewpoints emerge and dissenting opinions are voiced. Before standards or recommendations are finalized, they are often subject to public consultation, and the comments inform any final decisions. Staff from the Board engaged in these groups consult regularly with Board principals to ensure any final recommendations or standards align with the Board's policy goals. Once standards or recommendations are finalized, it is then up to individual members to implement any changes, as appropriate, in their respective jurisdictions. While the Board participates in these organizations, it is under no obligation to adopt any standards or recommendations that are developed. When the Board makes decisions about policy, it does so on the basis of its own domestic statutory mandates and responsibilities, and in accordance with U.S. administrative law, importantly, including an opportunity for public comment on the proposal. The Board does not implement standards or recommendations that are beyond the scope of our mandate or are otherwise not appropriate for our banks and our financial system. The Board is committed to transparency in its own work and is supportive of transparency by the international organizations in which it participates. The international organizations in which the Board participates publish information to keep the public informed of their work. The Board supports efforts by international organizations to regularly publish this information—including annual workplans and meeting summaries—and to subject work products such as proposed international standards and supervisory principles to public comment. Congressional oversight is an important feature of the U.S. regulatory framework. Congress has an oversight role for the Board's activities, including its participation in international organizations, and we welcome that oversight. Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the New Jersey Bankers Association Annual Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, New Jersey I would like to thank the New Jersey Bankers Association for the invitation to share my thoughts with you today.1While I welcome the opportunity to share my thoughts about monetary policy, the economy, and the path of regulatory reform, I find it even more valuable to hear your views on local banking and economic conditions in the communities you serve, and your perspectives on trends in bank regulation and supervision. These conversations provide valuable insights to inform my work at the Federal Reserve—both for my understanding of the economy and the banking environment. Before discussing bank regulation, I would like to briefly touch on the economy and monetary policy. Monetary PolicyOver the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our most recent meeting in January, we voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings. We have seen continued progress on inflation over the past year, with the 12-month readings through January of total and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation moving down to 2.4 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, both at the lowest rates we have seen since early 2021. Although inflation declined over the second half of 2023, the January inflation data suggest that progress in bringing inflation down further may be slower going forward. Throughout this time, economic activity has remained strong with ongoing strength in consumer spending. We had also seen signs of the labor market coming into better balance, but recent strong jobs reports—including upward revisions to employment growth—show a continued tight labor market. Last year, the average pace of job gains slowed and the labor force participation rate rose through November, with the unemployment rate edging up to 3.7 percent. In recent months, however, job growth has rebounded, and the labor force participation rate declined, retracing some of its earlier gains. At its current setting, our monetary policy stance is restrictive and appears to be appropriately calibrated to reduce inflationary pressures. As I've noted recently, my baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady, but I still see a number of upside inflation risks that affect my outlook. These include risks from geopolitical developments, including the risk of spillovers from geopolitical conflicts and the extent to which food and energy markets and supply chains remain exposed to these influences. There is also the risk that a loosening in financial conditions and additional fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. Recent labor market data suggest ongoing elevated wage growth as some businesses continue to report above-average wage increases to compensate for elevated prices and high inflation. Given these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years, as seen in the most recent employment report, make the task of assessing the current state of the economy as well as predicting how the economy will evolve even more challenging, and I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. Should the incoming data continue to indicate that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal, it will eventually become appropriate to gradually lower our policy rate to prevent monetary policy from becoming overly restrictive. In my view, we are not yet at that point. Reducing our policy rate too soon could result in requiring further future policy rate increases to return inflation to 2 percent over the longer run. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a restrictive level that will bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, I remain willing to raise the federal funds rate at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. Notable Developments in Bank Regulation and SupervisionAs I look at the bank regulatory agenda, I am struck by the sheer volume of matters that have recently been completed, that have been proposed, and that are in the pipeline. These reforms touch on a wide range of topics that directly or indirectly impact banks of all sizes. This work shows no signs of slowing down. The large number of finalized, proposed, and potential changes suggest insufficient prioritization in furthering the primary goal of prudential bank regulation and supervision—promoting a safe and sound banking system. In fulfilling this statutory objective, we must also focus on efficiency and effectiveness and always consider how regulatory reforms affect the banking market, the economy, and those who use banking services. We should also ensure, in our pursuit of reform, that our efforts result in a bank framework that is appropriately tailored and calibrated. I have spoken at length over the past few months about some recent notable developments in bank regulation, touching on capital reform, the Community Reinvestment Act, the cap on debit card interchange fees, and climate-related financial risk guidance.2Today, I want to recap my views on some of these developments, particularly around bank mergers and acquisitions (M&A), liquidity regulation, and trends in bank supervision. Bank mergers and acquisitionsBank mergers and acquisitions continue to be an important part of the banking ecosystem. In this process, timing is key. However, this is another policy area where I expect to see ongoing focus from federal regulators, the Department of Justice, and others. As policymakers engage on this topic, a key consideration should be whether the application process is fair, transparent, and consistent with the applicable statutory requirements.3And yet, policy reforms may make bank M&A transactions more difficult for regulators to approve and slow the application processing timeline. As all bankers know, application processing delays can be quite harmful, resulting in greater operational risk, increased expenses due in part to contract delays, reputational risk, and staff attrition due to the prolonged uncertainty. In the broader context, reducing the efficiency of bank mergers and acquisitions may also act as a deterrent to a healthy evolution of the banking system. Taken together, reducing merger or acquisition activity could have the consequence of prohibiting transactions that may preserve the presence of banks in rural or underserved areas, transactions that may further prudent growth strategies, or transactions that may result in increased competition with larger peers. Regulatory reforms in this area should prioritize speed and timeliness. Stakeholders who are concerned about current bank M&A procedures and policies should consider direct engagement with regulators.4 LiquidityFollowing the bank failures last spring, significant attention has been paid to the alleged "lessons learned" creating a path for regulatory reform efforts. This has generated discussion among both policymakers and the public on how to think about liquidity regulation: Should these requirements be expanded to a broader range of institutions? Should the calibration or operation of liquidity requirements like the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Net Stable Funding Ratio be modified? Should we consider new liquidity requirements, and if so, what form should they take? I have significant concerns about the path ahead as it comes to regulatory reforms involving liquidity requirements. All banks must manage their liquidity but should have flexibility based on a range of factors, including risk, business model, size, complexity, funding needs, vulnerability to deposit runs, and other considerations. Liquidity requirements, if not appropriately designed and calibrated, could trap resources that would otherwise be put to better use, like lending to bank customers. Before moving forward, we need to identify gaps in the current framework and build a foundation for any proposed changes that is based on research, evidence, and data. Liquidity regulation also has the potential to impose significant costs and limit the lending capacity and business operations of banks, which we must recognize and take into account before imposing any new requirements. We must think about liquidity broadly, including the sources and uses of liquidity that institutions use today, including the Federal Reserve's discount window and its role as lender of last resort, advances from the Federal Home Loan Banks, and other sources that may be available in the market. In this context, we must be honest about the capability and capacity of these resources, and the challenges and limits of these tools. Revisions to the liquidity framework must also be coordinated to ensure that reform efforts are complementary and can support the banking system's liquidity needs. When considering new liquidity requirements, we must think about not only calibration and scope, but also the unintended consequences of any such requirements and whether these measures will be effective during stressed conditions. Trends in supervisionDuring 2023 and into 2024, many banks reported very material shifts in bank examinations and ongoing intensification in supervisory expectations. Many of these examination-related shifts have received little public acknowledgement or attention in large part because the rules designed to protect confidential supervisory information frustrate visibility into structural shifts in the supervisory process. As you all know well, changes in supervisory expectations frequently come without the benefit of guidance, advance notice, or published rulemaking, and in the worst-case scenario these shifts, cloaked by the veil of supervisory opacity, can have significant financial and reputational impacts or can disrupt the management and operations of affected banks. These changes largely occurred after the bank failures in the spring of 2023 and the ensuing banking stress. In part, the changes in supervisory practices may be attributable to flawed post-mortem reviews conducted in the immediate aftermath of these failures. Many of these reviews suffered from serious shortcomings, including compressed timeframes for completion and the significantly limited matters that were within the scope of review. Nevertheless, these reviews were, and continue to be, singularly relied upon as a basis for resetting regulatory and supervisory priorities. These trends in supervision are concerning and add to the already significant burdens placed on regulated institutions from an aggressive regulatory reform agenda. I worry that the mere fact of bank failures and the material banking stress we experienced last year has been interpreted as a "blank check" to remake supervision as a blunt instrument, one that ignores the unique characteristics of each firm and the benefits of an approach that prioritizes engagement and communication between banks and examiners. Of course, the banking agencies cannot regulate our way to better or more effective supervision; in the aftermath of the banking stress, it is appropriate to look carefully at what is working, and what isn't, in the realm of bank supervision. But in doing so, we must appropriately manage our supervisory programs and teams to ensure that effective and consistent supervision is implemented within each firm, and that it is effective and consistent across our regulated entities. Conducting supervision in a manner that respects due process and provides transparency around supervisory expectations can help us accomplish these goals. Closing ThoughtsThank you again for the opportunity to speak with you today. We are experiencing significant changes in the banking industry, not least of which are those coming from the regulators. It is imperative that you continue engaging on all matters involving regulatory reform. Policymakers cannot fulfill the responsibility of promoting a safe and sound banking system if we ignore efficiency, tailoring, and appropriate calibration of requirements in the reform agenda. These tenets should be central to the reform process. I welcome your insight on what is working, what is not, and the real-world consequences of regulations and regulatory reform efforts. Your input helps us ensure that the bank regulatory framework supports safety and soundness in an efficient and fair way. Thank you for your continued engagement, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, FL, February 27, 2024).Return to text 3. See, e.g., Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), "Business Combinations Under the Bank Merger Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking," OCC Bulletin 2024-4, January 29, 2024.Return to text 4. One avenue by which interested parties can provide feedback is through the recently launched mandatory review of regulatory burdens under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and OCC, "Federal Bank Regulatory Agencies Seek Comment on Interagency Effort to Reduce Regulatory Burden," joint news release, February 6, 2024; and "Statement of Michelle W. Bowman on the Review of the Board's Regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA)," February 6, 2024.Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives Watch Live Chair Powell submitted identical remarks to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on March 7, 2024. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to present the Federal Reserve's semiannualMonetary Policy Report. The Federal Reserve remains squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. The economy has made considerable progress toward these objectives over the past year. While inflation remains above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objective of 2 percent, it has eased substantially, and the slowing in inflation has occurred without a significant increase in unemployment. As labor market tightness has eased and progress on inflation has continued, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals have been moving into better balance. Even so, the Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks and is acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials, like food, housing, and transportation. The FOMC is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. Restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. I will review the current economic situation before turning to monetary policy. Current Economic Situation and OutlookEconomic activity expanded at a strong pace over the past year. For 2023 as a whole, gross domestic product increased 3.1 percent, bolstered by solid consumer demand and improving supply conditions. Activity in the housing sector was subdued over the past year, largely reflecting high mortgage rates. High interest rates also appear to have been weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains relatively tight, but supply and demand conditions have continued to come into better balance. Since the middle of last year, payroll job gains have averaged 239,000 jobs per month, and the unemployment rate has remained near historical lows, at 3.7 percent. Strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers, particularly among individuals aged 25 to 54, and a continued strong pace of immigration. Job vacancies have declined, and nominal wage growth has been easing. Although the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. The strong labor market over the past two years has also helped narrow long-standing disparities in employment and earnings across demographic groups.1 Inflation has eased notably over the past year but remains above the FOMC's longer-run goal of 2 percent. Total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending in January. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent, a notable slowing from 2022 that was widespread across both goods and services prices. Longer-term inflation expectations appear to have remained well anchored, as reflected by a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Monetary PolicyAfter significantly tightening the stance of monetary policy since early 2022, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent since its meeting last July. We have also continued to shrink our balance sheet at a brisk pace and in a predictable manner. Our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. We believe that our policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back policy restraint at some point this year. But the economic outlook is uncertain, and ongoing progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective is not assured. Reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of progress we have seen in inflation and ultimately require even tighter policy to get inflation back to 2 percent. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. In considering any adjustments to the target range for the policy rate, we will carefully assess the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee does not expect that it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Federal Reserve will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions. 1. A box in our latestMonetary Policy Report,"Employment and Earnings across Demographic Groups," discusses differences in labor market outcomes among segments of the population.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Harvard Law School Faculty Club, Cambridge, Massachusetts Thank you for the invitation to join you this evening at Harvard Law School.1It is an honor and a pleasure to speak to this distinguished group. To kick off our conversation, I would like to frame the discussion by offering my views on a key element underpinning the U.S. bank regulatory framework: the role of tailoring. While the principle itself is simple—setting regulatory priorities and allocating supervisory resources in a risk-based way—the consequences of tailoring (or not) can reverberate throughout the banking system, the broader U.S. financial system, and the economy. I see a clear nexus between tailoring and fidelity to the law, including a targeted focus within our statutorily mandated prudential responsibilities. Tailoring as a Grounding PrincipleI have long been a proponent of tailoring and continue to consider it a strong foundational principle upon which to apply bank regulation and supervision. This approach ensures a focus on the most critical risks over time, avoiding the over-allocation of resources or imposition of unnecessary costs on the banking system. When we approach rulemaking with a commitment to tailoring, and to our broader prudential mandates, the public can judge our actions by how well they serve these ends, and they should rightly be concerned when regulatory actions seem to serve other goals. In this sense, tailoring keeps policymakers grounded and facilitates appropriate prioritization. Tailoring also allows us to allocate limited supervisory resources to most effectively support safety and soundness of the banking system and U.S. financial stability. In accordance with the law, the Federal Reserve, both in its monetary policy function and in the execution of its bank regulatory and supervisory responsibilities, is meant to operate independently and apolitically. But banking regulators have a responsibility to act in a way that proves this independence is warranted. We earn the right to operate with this independence when we consistently follow the law and achieve our prudential objectives. One of the most effective ways we accomplish this goal is through the appropriate prioritization of risks in the financial system. Regardless of the approach to bank regulation and supervision, bank regulators should be subject to oversight and accountability, to both Congress and the public. The principles that guide the execution of prudential responsibilities matter, especially when they further efficiency and effectiveness. Congress has embedded the concept of tailoring within the Federal Reserve's regulatory mandates, including the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, commonly referred to as S. 2155.2This law revised provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, amending thethresholdfor tailored application of enhanced prudential standards on certain regulated institutions.3Notably, S. 2155 did notintroducetailoring to these standards; it merely modified tailoring thresholds and mandated the Board implement this approach. To be clear, tailoring is not a pretext for deregulation but rather a principle that allows regulators to pursue required statutory objectives in the most efficient and effective way. Does Tailoring Need a Defender?I suppose one could view my support for tailoring as merely setting up a straw man; surely everyone agrees with tailoring in principle? On a superficial level, it is hard to argue with the principle that regulatory tailoring—matching regulation and supervision to risk—is a prudent approach for bank regulators. And yet the rhetoric supporting tailoring and risk-based supervision often does not match regulatory reform efforts or supervisory approaches. The criticisms rarely manifest as skepticism of the principle itself. Rather, they are implicit in the approach to regulation and supervisory guidance or are disguised as a criticism of theexecutionof tailoring. Both the pending capital reform proposals and the final climate guidance illustrate how regulatory actions can deviate from the principle of tailoring without any express recognition of this effect. The federal banking agencies have proposed several reforms to the capital framework, among them the Basel III "endgame" and new long-term debt requirements that would apply to all banks with over $100 billion in assets. I have expressed concern with both of these proposals on the merits, in terms of striking the right balance between safety and soundness and efficiency and fairness, and out of concern for potential unintended consequences. Another concern is whether these proposals show fidelity to the law, which requires regulatory tailoring above the $100 billion asset threshold. In 2019, the Board published its regulatory tailoring rule and included acompelling visual (PDF)that depicts in table form how a series of requirements—capital, single counterparty credit limits, liquidity, and the requirement to form a U.S. Intermediate Holding Company for foreign banking organizations—worked collectively to establish a tiered framework.4 If you superimpose the pending capital reform proposals on the table, there is a "flattening" of requirements in the capital bucket. Of course, this simple exercise does not reflect the unknown end state of the bank regulatory framework, and the current desire among some policymakers to modify liquidity requirements. These individual efforts highlight the hazard of piecemeal reforms, especially those that are closely related in their end-state operation, like capital and long-term debt requirements. When regulators pursue reforms by creating separate rulemaking silos, we limit our capacity to not only ensure fidelity to tailoring but also fidelity to our prudential mandates. Even when proposals have concurrent comment periods, the danger is that the final regulations will be miscalibrated and not appropriately tailored. Tailoring underpins not only effective regulation, but also effective bank supervision. The effectiveness of the interagency principles used by the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency for the management of climate-related financial risks could be evaluated as a supervisory tool through the lens of tailoring, which requires us to consider both the regulatory threshold for applicability and the content of the guidance.5One approach to evaluate the merit and effectiveness of these principles as a supervisory tool is through the lens of tailoring, which requires us to consider both the regulatory threshold for applicability and the content of the guidance. On its face, it applies to banks with $100 billion or more in consolidated assets. What does this threshold mean in practice? Guidance serves the role of illuminating supervisory priorities and expectations. These informal communications help bridge the divide between regulators and regulated entities. When guidance notes that "all financial institutions,regardless of size, may have material exposures to climate-related financial risks…,"6my intuition is that banks will take little comfort from the nominal carveout in light of this language. Apart from the general concern with the "cliff effect" threshold at $100 billion, I question whether any size threshold will apply in practice.7 The content of the guidance—and its expectations for larger banks—suggests that the motivation behind the principles is neither prudential considerations nor to further regulatory tailoring, as it has a somewhat tenuous connection to core safety and soundness considerations and seems destined to trickle down to smaller firms over time. Banks have long been exposed to climate- and weather-related financial risks and have long been required to manage all of their material risks, including these. But the principles seem oriented toward contributing to a policy matter that extends well beyond prudential bank regulation—namely how the U.S. and other governments around the world should address climate change. And the principles seem focused on highly uncertain risks well outside the normal temporal horizon of a bank supervisor. One could reasonably ask, do the principles result in appropriate, risk-based prioritization of supervisory concerns? It is possible that they prioritize risks that may not be the most relevant for safety and soundness and may effectively influence credit allocation decisions through regulations that are not driven primarily by prudential considerations. Bank regulators can acknowledge the importance of questions around climate change while also hewing to their statutory responsibilities. Promoting safety and soundness and U.S. financial stability is a weighty enough task without taking on other causes. The current regulatory agenda includes many other examples where similar arguments can be made that regulatory reform proposals lack sufficient attention to regulatory tailoring and thereby fail to further statutory directives to tailor certain requirements and, more importantly, to address the condition of the banking system. Apart from substantive deviations from regulatory tailoring, there are also indirect attacks on the value of tailoring as a principle to guide bank regulatory reforms. For example, one prominent argument raised shortly after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, and which has become a driving force in regulatory reform efforts, is that the Board'sapproachto tailoring was to blame for the bank failures and broader banking stress.8The argument is that a major factor contributing to the bank failures was the implementation of S. 2155, the statutory mandate to tailor regulation and an accompanying shift in supervisory policy. As I have noted many times in the past, I find little evidence to support this claim. While couched as a critique of theexecutionof tailoring, this argument also seems to challenge thevalueof tailoring, asserting that a simple solution would be to unwind regulatory tailoring and eliminate risk-based tailoring in supervision. Taking ownership and accountability of the supervisory issues that significantly contributed to the banking system stress last spring enables us to look critically at the approach to regulation and supervision in the lead-up to these failures, and appropriately address the shortcomings. Why Does Tailoring Matter?Before thinking about tailoring for smaller, simpler firms, I think it's helpful to think about the largest, most complex firms. Additional regulation and heightened supervisory attention are warranted and necessary for larger firms, particularly global systemically important banks (GSIBs) with additional size, risk, and complexity. This principle is so well-established that it was not only a core precept of S. 2155, it was a central theme of the Dodd-Frank Act.9We need not rely on past views about the virtue of tailoring—what was once conventional wisdom—to believe in its ongoing relevance. One critique of tailoring may be with what underlying "problem" it is designed to solve, particularly as it relates to the allocation of finite resources both for banks and for regulators. Are regulatory and supervisory resources actually limited, and if so, what are the practical constraints on these resources? At a basic level, the quantum of regulatory and supervisory resources is a policy decision—as regulatory and supervisory demands grow, so too can the staffs and budgets of the federal banking agencies. The U.S. financial system is expansive and regulators have the capacity to expand supervisory resources as needed (or as perceived) to address safety and soundness concerns. Of course, there are practical constraints on an ever-expanding and stricter bank regulatory framework. First, the funding of regulatory and supervisory expansion imposes costs not only on U.S. taxpayers but also on banks, and indirectly, bank customers. While the banking system has many advantages—including the use of insured deposits as a source of financing banking activities—at some point, this structural advantage will erode under the cumulative burden of the regulatory framework and will result in a shift of activities from banks to nonbanks and the broader shadow-banking system. The contours of the financial system, where products and services are offered, does not exist according to the bright line of federal regulatory authority. We would be well served to recognize the limitations of a regulatory perimeter that pushes activity outside of the banking system and beyond this authority. Unintended ConsequencesAs we consider the merits of tailoring, we should consider the consequences of not adhering to this principle in regulation and supervision, and related reform proposals. As a threshold matter, a bank regulatory approach that disregards tailoring can manifest in different ways, such as uniformity in approach—failing to differentiate among institutions based on their size, risk, and complexity—or by adopting regulatory "cliffs" clustered around thresholds that insufficiently distinguish among institutions based on these factors. In both cases, deviating from tailoring could result in fundamental changes to the structure of the U.S. banking system. One risk of uniform requirements is the consolidation pressure it creates. Apart from the shortcomings I've discussed in appropriate risk-based prioritization within the bank regulatory framework, this approach encourages consolidation, as institutions seek operational economies of scale to gain competitive advantage over their peers. In this scenario, the benefits of being large, risky, and complex become a driving force in the organization of the banking industry. I think we should consider the implications not only for regulatory efficiency, but also whether this approach represents waving the white flag in fighting against the assertion that certain institutions are "too big to fail." Even where standards are not uniform, a lack of sufficient tailoring can reshape the banking industry, simply through the cliff effects created around particular regulatory thresholds. For example, capital reform and climate regulation would establish $100 billion as the key regulatory threshold, lending additional gravity to the decision to cross, or even approach it, with the consequence of reducing the number of institutions around that threshold. Institutionsabovethe threshold will face strong incentives to grow larger to achieve economies of scale. Institutionsbelowthe threshold will face strong incentives to manage their size to avoid the significant intensification of requirements that apply as they approach $100 billion in assets. This scenario also has significant implications for the too-big-to-fail issue, as well as for industry competition over the long term. Regulatory costs that are disproportionate to a firm's risk create incentives for activities to migrate out of the banking system entirely, which we have seen as a consequence of past regulatory reform efforts. In my view, implicit in the statutory mandate to promote safety and soundness, and financial stability, is that we allow banks to continue serving their role in the U.S. financial system and in support of the economy. Fidelity to the law does not require regulators to create a bank regulatory framework that eliminates risk: banking is inherently about managing, not eliminating, risk. ClosingThank you, again, for the invitation to speak with you, and I look forward to our discussion. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 3. Pub. L. No. 115-174, § 401(a)(1), amending 12 U.S.C. § 5365.Return to text 4. See Tailoring Rule Visual, "Requirements for Domestic and Foreign Banking Organizations (PDF)," October 10, 2019.Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Agencies Issue Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions," news release, October 24, 2023.Return to text 6. 88 Fed. Reg. 74,183–184 (October 30, 2023).Return to text 7. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Reflections on the Economy and Bank Regulation (PDF)" (speech at the Florida Bankers Association Leadership Luncheon Events, Miami, Florida, February 27, 2024).Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank (PDF)," (Washington: Board of Governors, April 2023), introductory letter by Michael S. Barr, (concluding that "[t]he Board's tailoring approach in response to the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) and a shift in the stance of supervisory policy impeded effective supervision by reducing standards, increasing complexity, and promoting a less assertive supervisory approach.").Return to text 9. Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376, 1423, § 165 (July 21, 2010).Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At Ec10b Principles of Economics Lecture, Department of Economics, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts Thank you, Jason, for your kind introduction. I appreciate the opportunity to return to Harvard and teach the Ec10 class today. When I taught at Harvard, only the most gifted instructors and teaching fellows were allowed to teach and appear before students in this course. It seems today that standards may have slipped, but I am nevertheless honored to be here. I will start by saying what I said at the beginning of every course I taught here and in my entire career as an academic economist. "It is a great time to be an economist!" Economics provides powerful tools for understanding the forces that affect your lives, especially in times of upheaval and change. This is another reason I am delighted to be part of this course that covers a broad range of economic thinking. Today, I will focus my talk on three topics: the Federal Reserve's dual mandate goals for monetary policy, recent indicators of progress toward meeting those goals, and what we call the evolving "balance of risks," which means how the probabilities of missing one of those goals, compared to the other, change over time.1My main message is that, following a period of unusually high inflation and rapid monetary-policy tightening, inflation has fallen considerably while the labor market has remained strong. As a result of these welcome developments, the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals are moving into better balance. Nonetheless, fully restoring price stability may take a cautious approach to easing monetary policy over time. Let me add some background here. Congress has given the Federal Reserve's monetary policymakers a mandate and the independence with which to pursue it. The Fed's modern statutory mandate, as described in the 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act, is to promote maximum employment and stable prices.2These goals are commonly referred to as the dual mandate.3I will elaborate on the benefits of achieving these objectives, starting with maximum employment. Benefits of Maximum EmploymentI gave a speech last fall that described the evolution of the Federal Reserve's employment mandate.4I discussed how leaders of the civil rights movement, including Coretta Scott King, identified unemployment as a pernicious factor holding back disadvantaged communities and people. Mrs. King wisely noted that "unemployment lies at the root of all our major social problems."5Economists also understand that high unemployment has painful consequences for individual workers and their families. These include reduced living standards and a greater incidence of poverty. High levels of employment are key to a vibrant economy. It means that a vital resource is being used most productively, resulting in a larger and more prosperous economy. Maximum employment promotes business investment, boosting productivity and the economy's long-run growth potential. And the full participation of all segments of society should foster the development and dissemination of more ideas, including more diverse ideas, more invention, and more innovation.6 A strong labor market also tends to increase labor force participation and makes employers more willing to recruit and upgrade the skills of workers. When the Federal Reserve held a series of community outreach events in 2019, calledFed Listens, one of the key messages we heard was that a strong labor market brings in people who might be on the sidelines of the economy but who have skills that can be developed, if given a chance. Benefits of Price StabilityNow let us consider the purpose of the other part of our mandate, price stability, by which I mean low inflation.7Former Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan once said, "Price stability is that state in which expected changes in the general price level do not effectively alter business or household decisions."8He meant that when households and businesses can reasonably expect inflation to remain low and stable, they are able to make sound decisions regarding saving, borrowing, and investment, thereby contributing to a well-functioning and growing economy. Low and stable inflation reduces uncertainty about future prices and business conditions, promoting a favorable environment for investment in productive capacity and human potential. Price stability means avoiding periods of high inflation, which are a particular burden on those who are disadvantaged and least able to bear it. The costs of inflation were described by many community members in theFed Listensevents that the Federal Reserve has held in the past couple of years. Price stability also creates the conditions for a sustainably strong labor market. If inflation fluctuates a lot, it may require a more forceful monetary policy response, and the process of reining in inflation can contribute to bouts of higher unemployment. In contrast, price stability provides a background against which employment can rise more steadily, which is why well-anchored inflation expectations are so important. Price Stability: Evolution and International ComparisonsWhile the Fed has considered price stability a key objective for its entire 110‑year history and the 1977 amendment made price stability an official goal in the Federal Reserve Act, a specific numerical objective for inflation is a relatively recent development. The breakthrough came in January 2012, when the monetary policymakers who make up the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) stated that they judge that inflation of 2 percent over the longer run, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), is most consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate of maximum employment and price stability. There were a few reasons to set an inflation of target of 2 percent, rather than zero.9Near-zero inflation can slide into sustained deflation, which is often associated with significant job losses, and debt burdens increase when prices are falling. A positive inflation target also allows the central bank more room to adjust its nominal policy rate to achieve a real interest rate sufficiently negative to provide stimulus during economic downturns. Among advanced economies (those with a high level of per capita GDP and globally integrated financial markets), all central banks have a mandate of price stability with a numerical objective. Most have 2 percent as either the target or the midpoint of a target range. Maximum Employment: Evolution and International ComparisonsAlthough other advanced-economy central banks do not have a dual mandate like the Fed, most of them explicitly or implicitly consider employment or economic activity in their setting of monetary policy. Statutorily, employment is often a secondary mandate to price stability. Functionally, these other central banks tend to describe the outlook for employment as affecting the speed with which they attempt to return inflation to their target. For instance, if there is a shock that raises inflation above the target at a time when the unemployment rate is also high, such a central bank would tighten policy less than if its only objective was to move inflation back to that target as quickly as possible. This way of operationalizing inflation targeting implies that there is a significant weight on employment in monetary policy decisions. In the case of the United States, the difference is that Congress made the Fed's employment mandate more explicit. Employment was always mentioned as an objective of the Fed, but the 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act made it part of the main U.S. law applying to monetary policy. The Fed has not set a numerical target for its mandate of maximum employment. The unemployment rate is a key variable in evaluating progress toward that goal. Economists have a concept of the natural rate of unemployment, sometimes called u*, defined as the rate of unemployment compatible with a steady inflation rate. But u* cannot be directly measured and is only imprecisely estimated. Moreover, it likely changes over time as the structure of the economy evolves. The aggregate unemployment rate is also not the only consideration in determining whether we are meeting our maximum-employment goal. Labor force participation also matters, as well as other elements of the labor market that I will discuss later. Monetary Policy TradeoffsHow should we think about the tradeoff between our two goals? There is no long-run tradeoff that monetary policy can exploit. Monetary policy is generally thought to be able to control inflation over the long run. In contrast, the maximum level of employment depends on structural forces and economic policies beyond the influence of monetary policy. In the short run, the two mandates often suggest the same course of action. This is particularly true in the presence of demand shocks. For instance, a negative demand shock in the economy will tend to raise unemployment and also put downward pressure on inflation. In this case, both mandates suggest a need for monetary stimulus to increase demand in the economy, bring down unemployment, and keep inflation from falling significantly below target. However, a negative supply shock (like a rise in oil prices) will tend to increase both inflation and unemployment at first, which creates a short-run tradeoff for monetary policy. Stimulus to bring down unemployment could push inflation even higher, but responding aggressively to inflation may have significant employment costs. The FOMC lays out our approach to this potential tradeoff in its annual Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which says the following: The Committee's employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate.10 In 2022 and into 2023, with unemployment near historical lows but inflation at its highest level in four decades, it was clear that this approach to meeting the dual mandate implied forceful tightening of monetary policy. More recently, with inflation having fallen substantially, even as the labor market has remained strong, it is worth considering how economic developments may have shifted policy tradeoffs and associated risks. Inflation IndicatorsHow do we evaluate whether we are meeting our dual-mandate goals? Starting with inflation, we look at the 12-month change in the PCE price index, which rose to more than 7 percent in mid-2022 (slide 1).As economies around the world gradually reopened after pandemic-related shutdowns, demand picked up, especially for goods. But supply chains were slower to recover, leading to a global surge in inflation. That surge was followed by a further upswing in inflation after February 2022, when Russia's invasion of Ukraine reduced global supplies of commodities, including oil and natural gas, food, and fertilizers. Since then, supply bottlenecks have eased, labor supply has recovered robustly, and aggregate demand has been dampened by higher interest rates and the end of pandemic-era fiscal support. With supply and demand coming into better balance, PCE inflation has retreated, reaching 2.4 percent in January. Because monetary policy affects the real economy, or the part of the economy that involves producing goods and services, with a lag and affects inflation with an even longer lag, monetary policy must be forward-looking. Therefore, we look at measures that may provide better guides to the direction of future inflation. One such measure is core inflation (excluding food and energy prices, which tend to be volatile). Core inflation rose less sharply than overall inflation but has also moved down a bit less, to 2.8 percent in January. To understand how inflation has evolved in recent years, we can look at its components (slide 2). Food and energy prices helped drive the rise in inflation following the shocks from the pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Inflation in these two volatile categories has slowed considerably since 2022 as supply constraints have eased, although the level of grocery prices (in particular) remains elevated, which is a burden on many households. Among components of core inflation, core goods prices were most affected by supply bottlenecks and the shift toward more goods consumption during the pandemic. Core goods inflation also has slowed most appreciably over the past two years, returning recently to its pre-pandemic trend of prices falling moderately. One salient example of the turnaround is in the motor vehicle sector. Shortages of computer chips used as components sharply curtailed automobile production, even as consumer demand for autos rose amid reduced usage of public transportation. Those chip shortages drove vehicle prices sharply higher, and their resolution and the subsequent rebound in auto production have driven a decline in vehicle prices over the past year. Prices of core services excluding housing did not rise as dramatically as goods, but inflation in those services has also not come down as quickly. That partly reflected strong demand as households resumed their consumption of in-person services like travel and dining. At the same time, because services prices tend to be adjusted less frequently than goods prices, it could also be that some prices are still adjusting to the increase in input costs during the pandemic. Housing services prices were boosted by several factors. The surge in working from home increased demand for larger homes and those located in less expensive metro areas or further from city centers. Because these shifts in demand happened much more rapidly than the response in housing supply, rents increased quite notably, especially for single-family detached homes. Initially, new and existing homeowners were able to lock in historically low long-term mortgage rates, which also drove up the demand for housing. The housing-services price index adjusts with a lag to changes in market rents (or the rent charged to a new tenant), because the index measures the rise in rents for all tenants, including those with continuing leases whose rent is unchanged (slide 3). But eventually, as leases turn over, changes in the rental market are reflected in housing services prices. Although housing-services inflation remains quite high, the current low rate of increase on new rental leases suggests that it will continue to fall. The public's expectations of future inflation affect spending decisions today and in the near term, and, therefore, also influence current inflation. The Federal Reserve looks at a range of indicators of inflation expectations. Surveys of inflation expectations among consumers and businesses can be informative, as are market-based measures such as those from inflation-indexed Treasury securities (slide 4). These measures tell a similar story. Shorter-run expectations rose through early 2022 amid uncertainty about the ultimate level and persistence of inflation. The sharp monetary policy tightening that began in the spring of 2022 likely helped rein in those expectations, which have since fallen to near pre-pandemic levels, and kept longer-run inflation expectations from rising above the range observed over the couple of decades before the pandemic. Labor Market IndicatorsAs I indicated earlier, an appropriate assessment of labor market conditions requires looking at a range of indicators. But, certainly, a key indicator in evaluating the strength of the labor market is the unemployment rate, which has remained near historical lows even as the Fed has tightened policy and inflation has come down (slide 5). Labor force participation also matters (slide 6). Good job opportunities can pull more people into the workforce. In the four years before the pandemic, a strong labor market pulled in many workers aged 25 to 54, a group whose participation is less affected by schooling and retirement. After falling sharply during the pandemic, participation in that age group has rebounded to its highest level in two decades. The rise was especially sizable for women in this age range, whose participation rates recently reached all-time highs, perhaps boosted by the increased flexibility for those able to work from home. In contrast, participation among workers aged 55 or older has not recovered from its decline during the pandemic. Older workers faced the greatest health risk from the pandemic. And their withdrawal from the labor market during the pandemic may have led to a more permanent exit for this group, as they were already near or above typical retirement ages. In addition, the surge in housing and stock prices substantially raised the wealth levels of many in this age group, and this factor may have reduced some households' reliance on labor income. One measure of the tightness or looseness of the labor market is available jobs versus available workers (slide 7).The number of total available jobs (which includes employed workers and job openings) still exceeds the number of available workers in the labor force. This jobs–workers gap was around 2.4 million in February, down significantly from its peak of 6 million in March 2022 but still above its 2019 average of 1.1 million. Part of the narrowing in this gap may have come from immigration. The rebound in immigration from the lows recorded during the pandemic has boosted growth in the working-age population. Churn, or an elevated level of turnover, in the labor market was prevalent during the initial recovery from the pandemic-related downturn. Workers saw opportunities to get a better job or higher pay elsewhere, driving up the share who voluntarily quit their jobs (slide 8). Signs that the labor market is normalizing have emerged more recently. Quits, which were very elevated in 2021 and 2022, have fallen below pre-pandemic levels. And the wage growth differential between job switchers and those staying in their jobs has narrowed.11 Comprehensive measures of wage growth also show gradual cooling. Notably, the employment cost index for the private sector rose 4.1 percent on a 12-month basis in December, down from 5.1 percent over the previous 12 months but still well above the pace in the years before the pandemic (slide 9). To some extent, this elevated wage growth is catching up to the previous surge in inflation. Whether wage growth at these levels is associated with upward pressure on inflation depends importantly on trends in labor productivity and on whether firms allow their profit margins to fall. If productivity growth is strong, that is, if more output can be produced with fewer inputs, a faster pace of wage growth need not be inflationary. Measured productivity is usually volatile and has been especially so since the pandemic (slide 10). Nonetheless, an important part of the strong supply response last year was labor productivity growth, which was a robust 2.6 percent. The recent surge in measured productivity may reflect a few factors. One is that labor market churn during the earlier stages of this expansion may have moved workers to higher-paying, more productive jobs.12Another possible factor is that the rise in new businesses since the pandemic may increase innovation over time.13 Looking ahead, I see artificial intelligence (AI) as a potentially significant source of productivity growth. If for no other reason, it could greatly increase the speed with which ideas are disseminated into the economy. But that will take time. Although adoption of generative AI is happening at a rapid clip, we know from economic history that the full benefit of a new technology requires complementary investment as well as changes in corporate structure, management practices, and worker training. The Balance of Risks for Monetary PolicyTaking all these inflation and labor market indicators together, and as noted in the most recent FOMC statement, the risks to achieving our inflation and employment goals are moving into better balance. The risk of easing monetary policy too much or too soon is that it could allow above-target inflation to become entrenched and halt the progress that we have seen. That would ultimately require more-restrictive monetary policy to wring more-persistent inflation out of the economy, at a potentially high cost to employment. But easing too late could also do unnecessary harm by holding back the economy and depriving people of economic opportunities. The path of disinflation, as expected, has been bumpy and uneven, but a careful approach to further policy adjustments can ensure that inflation will return sustainably to 2 percent while striving to maintain the strong labor market. I have covered a lot of ground with you today, material that you will learn more about if you choose further study of macroeconomics, or economics more generally. I hope you will find, as I have, that this journey feeds your curiosity, sharpens your thinking, and expands your horizons. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Before the 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act, maximum employment was already a legislated goal, applying to the whole of the federal government, through the Employment Act of 1946. One of the Employment Act's additional legislated goals, maximum purchasing power, had been interpreted as amounting to a price-stability goal.Return to text 3. The 1977 amendment called on monetary policy "to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates"; quoted text from theFederal Reserve Actis in 12 U.S.C. § 225a (2000). This formulation of the mandate drew on wording previously used in a joint Congressional resolution voted on in 1975; see David López-Salido, Emily J. Markowitz, and Edward Nelson (2024). "Continuity and Change in the Federal Reserve's Perspective on Price Stability," manuscript, Federal Reserve Board, January. In practice, the three goals listed in the statute have been seen as amounting to a dual mandate. The reason for this was noted by Frederic S. Mishkin, who remarked in a speech that "because long-term interest rates can remain low only in a stable macroeconomic environment, these goals are often referred to as the dual mandate"; see Frederic S. Mishkin (2007), "Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Virginia, April 10, paragraph 3.Return to text 4. See Lisa D. Cook (2023), "The Evolution of the Federal Reserve's Employment Mandate," speech delivered at the Louis E. Martin Awards Ceremony at the 2023 Future of Black Communities Summit, Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C., October 18.Return to text 5. Quoted text is from a video provided by the King Center of Coretta Scott King speaking at "Overcoming the Barriers to Full Employment" at Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, January 13, 1978.Return to text 6. See Lisa D. Cook, Janet Gerson, and Jennifer Kuan (2022), "Closing the Innovation Gap in Pink and Black," in Josh Lerner and Scott Stern, eds.,Entrepreneurship and Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 43–66; Paul M. Romer (1986), "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94 (October), pp. 1002–37; and Paul M. Romer (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change,"Journal of Political Economy, vol. 98 (October), pp. S71–102.Return to text 7. See Ben S. Bernanke (2006), "The Benefits of Price Stability," speech delivered at the Center for Economic Policy Studies and on the occasion of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., February 24.Return to text 8. Greenspan made the remark during the July 2–3, 1996, FOMC meeting, the transcript of which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC19960703meeting.pdf.Return to text 9. One reason is possible upward bias in measures of inflation, having to do with substitution, quality adjustments, and the introduction of new products. In addition, the downward rigidity of nominal wages (and some prices) implies that a positive inflation target allows more scope for adjustment of relative prices needed to send price signals in the economy.Return to text 10. See paragraph 6 of the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf.Return to text 11. Data are from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Wage Growth Tracker.Return to text 12. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023), "The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised November 2023).Return to text 13. See Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2023), "Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: Causes and Consequences? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 28–29.Return to text On March 25, 2024, this speech was updated to add a new footnote 6 and renumber the remaining footnotes. Accessible Version
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Thank you, Barbara, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.1My subject, as it often is, is the outlook for the U.S. economy, and how that affects the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) continuing effort to reduce inflation to a sustained level of 2 percent while maintaining a healthy labor market. We made a lot of headway toward our inflation goal in 2023, and the labor market moved substantially into better balance, all while holding the unemployment rate below 4 percent for nearly two years. But the data we have received so far this year has made me uncertain about the speed of continued progress. Back in February, I noted that data on fourth quarter gross domestic product (GDP) as well as January data on job growth and inflation came in hotter than expected. I concluded then that we needed time to verify that the progress on inflation we saw in the second half of 2023 would continue, which meant there was no rush to begin cutting interest rates to normalize the stance of monetary policy. Over the past month, additional economic data has reinforced this view. February job gains moved back up to 275,000, making the three-month average a strong 265,000, and various inflation measures have continued to come in hot. Core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation jumped to 0.4 percent on a monthly basis in January, after averaging around 0.1 percent in October through December last year. And with February consumer price index (CPI) and producer price index inflation data in hand, some forecasts are predicting core PCE inflation may be revised up for January and is expected to come in at 0.3 percent for February, which we will learn about on Friday. Adding this new data to what we saw earlier in the year reinforces my view that there is no rush to cut the policy rate. Indeed, it tells me that it is prudent to hold this rate at its current restrictive stance perhaps for longer than previously thought to help keep inflation on a sustainable trajectory toward 2 percent. I continue to believe that further progress will make it appropriate for the FOMC to begin reducing the target range for the federal funds rate this year. But until that progress materializes, I am not ready to take that step. Fortunately, the strength of the U.S. economy and resilience of the labor market mean the risk of waiting a little longer to ease policy is small and significantly lower than acting too soon and possibly squandering our progress on inflation. Turning to the performance of the U.S. economy, the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow model, based on all current data, predicts first quarter growth in real GDP of 2.1 percent at an annual rate. Similarly, the consensus from the Blue Chip survey of private sector forecasters is 2 percent. This would be a significant slowdown from the average of around 4 percent in the second half of 2024 but still quite solid growth. Consumer spending, the largest component of GDP, seems to be moderating this quarter. Retail sales fell significantly in January and then retraced about half of that decline in February. Smoothing out these swings, they clearly indicate a moderation in goods spending from the second half of last year. However, services spending, excluding energy, grew moderately in January, which offset to some extent the decline in goods spending. I will be watching on Friday morning to see what the February data on personal income and spending show. On the business side, surveys of purchasing managers in February continued to report results we have been hearing for over a year. For manufacturers, the Institute for Supply Management indicated a slight contraction in activity, with new orders and production moving down a bit. This contrasts with nonmanufacturing businesses that continued to see an expansion in activity, with measures of new orders and business activity on the higher end of their readings over the past year. Now let me turn to the labor market. The data is sending a mixed message on how supply and demand are evolving. As I noted earlier, payroll data estimate that employers added 275,000 jobs in February. This robust gain is not only above the 265,000 average level of job creation since November, but also above the 251,000 monthly average for all of 2023. Recent gains have been broad based across most sectors, rather than concentrated in a few sectors, which may be a sign that demand is not moderating as much as is needed to support continued progress on inflation. Conversely, the household survey estimated that the unemployment rate rose to 3.9 percent in February. But that increase was driven mostly by an outsized rise in the number of 16- to 24-year-olds counted as unemployed. Youth employment tends to be volatile, so this rate may drop back in the next few months and, if so, pull the overall unemployment rate back down as well. Another sign of loosening in the labor market is that the number of people quitting their jobs has fallen below the levels just before the pandemic. I believe most workers quit their jobs for better pay or other benefits. So less turnover means firms do not need to enhance their compensation packages to attract workers. In reviewing wage pressures, the most recent data suggest nominal wage growth has continued to ease. But most of these measures are still above their pre-pandemic levels. And, considering overall compensation—wages and benefits —here, too, growth has slowed but remains a bit elevated. Looking across various indicators of labor demand, there hasn't been much change in recent months. Job openings drifted down last year but then flattened out recently at a still elevated level, while the pace of hiring is close to its pre-pandemic level. With strong labor supply and little apparent change in demand in recent months, the ratio of vacancies to people looking for work has been roughly flat after declining significantly in 2023. At 1.4 jobs for each person looking, that ratio is down from 2022's peak of around 2 and indicates that the labor market has loosened up. But the vacancies-to-unemployed rate is still higher than the 1.2 that prevailed before the pandemic and has held steady around 1.4 for several months, which suggests that the labor market remains tight. Let me turn to a topic related to the labor market that has important implications for the longer-term course of U.S. economy: productivity. When productivity across the economy grows quickly, it means that output and income can also grow quickly without putting upward pressure on inflation, so it supports rising living standards. And lately, productivity has been growing fast. Over the final three quarters of 2023, it grew at a pace a bit under 4 percent, much faster than the average since the 1970s. Some have argued that this must be why we had such strong economic growth in 2023, even while inflation was slowing. Perhaps, they say, we are at the start of another era of fast and sustained productivity growth, such as the United States experienced from 1998 through 2004. Believe me, I hope this is true, because it would be the basis for broadly shared prosperity that raises living standards, but I am skeptical that it will last. The first thing to note is that productivity growth is notoriously volatile. Though productivity grew fast for the final nine months of last year, it actually fell in the first quarter of 2023 and rather substantially for all of 2022. One may view this fast growth as making up for the earlier declines. In fact, smoothing across the past two years, productivity growth averages a bit above 1.25 percent annually. Also keep in mind that periods of fast growth that last more than a few years are unusual, and it is also difficult to be sure about the causes. When thinking about productivity, one has to distinguish between factors that raise productivity in the short run but ultimately are one-off increases in thelevelof productivity, as opposed to those that increase the long-rungrowthrateof productivity so that the level is constantly increasing. So let me posit several factors that have been suggested for explaining the recent increase in productivity and try to place them in the one-off or long-run buckets. Many people point to recent large investment projects in the United States, such as those associated with the Inflation Reduction Act or artificial intelligence, as boosting productivity. But these investments will take place over many years and may not have done much yet to add to the nation's productive capacity. While it is possible they could increase longer-run productivity growth, it remains to be seen if they will. Thus, they are unlikely to explain the recent rise in productivity growth. The recent surge in business start-ups after a sustained lull has also been mentioned as a factor. Like the investment projects, it may be causing a boost to productivity, but it is likely to occur over a number of years. And, unless the current boom in new business formation continues into the future, once again this factor will at best raise the level of productivity over the short term and not the long-run growth rate. Another factor that is often pointed to is the resolution of supply chain problems. But once the supply chain issues are resolved, this boost to productivity growth will end, so this clearly is a short-run factor that will simply raise the level but not the long-run growth rate of productivity. Another potential cause of recent productivity growth is that the pandemic changed how we work and use technology. While I certainly can see how this could affect the level of productivity and short-run growth, once we have made those changes, they're done, so I don't see this as a driver of sustained productivity growth. I have also heard the argument that when labor turnover was very high during the pandemic, new hires were being trained, and by the time they were ready to start contributing to production, they would leave for a new job and start a new training process. Now that the pace of turnover is back down to normal levels, firms are reaping the benefits of keeping newly trained workers who then move up the learning curve at the firm. Again, while I see this raising the level of productivity in the short run, it may simply be returning productivity to previous levels. I will be watching how productivity evolves in the near term. I will keep my fingers crossed for more good news, but I am not convinced that the recent boom in productivity growth will continue. Therefore, I will keep that in mind as I form my judgments about the economic outlook and appropriate setting of monetary policy. Now let's talk about inflation. We made a lot of headway in reducing inflation in the past year or so, although the readings in the past two months have been disappointing. Both total CPI inflation and core inflation that excludes energy and food rounded to a 0.4 percent increase for the month of February, which is obviously not progress toward our inflation goal. While housing services prices, which rose in January, moderated a bit, core goods prices, which had been falling recently, rose due to elevated import price increases. In trying to judge what the underlying trend is for inflation, I tend to look at annualized core measures over 3 or 6 months. For most of a year, I watched these numbers come down more quickly than 12-month readings, telling me that we were making substantial progress. But, more recently, the 3-month core CPI, which was running at a 3.3 percent rate in December, rose to 4.2 percent in February. Six-month core CPI, which was also 3.3 percent in December, was up to 3.9 percent last month. These shorter-term inflation measures are now telling me that progress has slowed and may have stalled. But we will need more data to know that. The FOMC uses personal consumption expenditure inflation data to measure progress toward our 2 percent goal, and we won't get those results for February until Friday. But, as I noted at the start, based on the consumer and producer prices that we do have, estimates suggest that core PCE inflation is likely to be elevated. Though the February reading is estimated to step down from January's, this recent pace would not represent significant progress toward 2 percent. Let me pause here and make an important point about how I think about and want to talk about adverse developments such as this recent inflation data and how as a policymaker I manage risks to the economic outlook. It is appropriate to point out that a month or two of data does not necessarily indicate a trend, and there are good reasons to think that progress on inflation will be uneven but likely to continue down toward 2 percent. At the same time, monetary policy is data driven, and I do want to take it into account when formulating my economic outlook. While I don't want to over-react to two months of data, I do think it is appropriate to react to it. There is ample evidence that the recent data has also been taken on board by both financial markets and forecasters in adjusting their views of the economic outlook. The markets have pulled back the number of expected rate cuts in 2024. FOMC participants have also adjusted their views on policy in response to recent data and it is reflected in the Summary of Economic Projections. Comparing the December 2023 projections to those just released, one sees that the median number of cuts in the federal funds rate for 2024 is still three, but the dots for 2024 have moved up, meaning at least several policymakers removed one or more cuts from their projection. In fact, the number of policymakers expecting more than three cuts in 2024 decreased significantly, while the number expecting two or fewer increased. I interpret this as showing that the Committee is not over-reacting to the recent data but is not discounting it either. In my view, it is appropriate to reduce the overall number of rate cuts or push them further into the future in response to the recent data. This reflects the reality of managing an outlook in real time as data comes in. Subsequent data may well alter this outlook again, but we shall see. Based on what we know now, there is no urgency in taking that step. So where do I see things standing? I see economic output and the labor market showing continued strength, while progress in reducing inflation has slowed. Because of these signs, I see no rush in taking the step of beginning to ease monetary policy. The target range for the federal funds rate has been 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent since last July, and I believe that this restrictive level is helping to reduce imbalances in the economy and continuing to put downward pressure on inflation. All indications are that the economy continues to grow at a healthy pace. While retail sales and some other indicators suggest a softening in demand this quarter from the second half of last year, when growth accelerated, the evidence for a significant slowdown is sparse. Meanwhile, as the labor market continues to add jobs at a rapid pace, some signs point to improvement in the imbalance between supply and demand, but others indicate continued tightness. My judgment on the balance of risks for monetary policy, which I explained in a speech on February 22, hasn't changed: The risk of waiting a little longer to cut rates is significantly lower than acting too soon.2Cutting the policy rate too soon and risking a sustained rebound in inflation is something I want to avoid. As a result, in the absence of an unexpected and material deterioration in the economy, I am going to need to see at least a couple months of better inflation data before I have enough confidence that beginning to cut rates will keep the economy on a path to 2 percent inflation. Fortunately, we can wait to see how the data come in before deciding the appropriate time to start lowering the policy rate. The remarkable U.S. economy keeps on chugging along, adding jobs at a rate that over time will keep unemployment near its current, historically low rate. But the overall strength of the U.S. economy makes it a fairly easy decision to wait a little longer to get a better understanding of the trajectory of inflation and, when appropriate, begin easing policy. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller (2024), "What's the Rush?" speech delivered at the Finding Forward Speaker Series, University of St. Thomas, Opus College of Business, Minneapolis, Minnesota, February 22.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the 2024 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York Thank you, it is great to be here. I'm pleased to participate in this panel to discuss a policy action now being implemented by central banks around the globe: quantitative tightening (QT).1I want to thank Kristin, Matt, and Wenxin for putting together a great paper that provides an overview of the effects of QT across seven central banks. Often called "large-scale asset purchases" (LSAPs) by central bankers, the view of quantitative easing, or QE, as a tool to add monetary policy accommodation and QT to tighten policy has changed over time. When it was used during and after the Global Financial Crisis, QE was deemed an "unconventional" tool in central banks' arsenals. But QE has now been used numerous times in the past two decades for extended periods when the policy rate was at the effective lower bound, so I would say it is no longer unconventional. Given the role of QE and QT in the policy toolkit, it is good to have researchers and policymakers examine how asset purchases work and talk about current issues associated with their implementation. This paper is very timely and thorough in looking across countries and their experiences with QE and QT. There is a lot packed into this work that makes it a little difficult to fully assess in the time we have today. So I will focus my comments on four points: (1) the evidence that the effects of QE are asymmetric to the effects of QT; (2) the execution of QE versus the execution of QT in the United States; (3) the role of announcement effects of QT; and, finally, (4) who has taken the Fed's place in buying assets when we withdraw from the market. I will then end with some thoughts about issues facing the Federal Reserve as we move forward with normalizing our balance sheet. The Asymmetry of Quantitative Easing versus Quantitative TighteningFor me, one of the most interesting results of the paper is that the announcement effects of quantitative easing are much larger than the announcement effects of quantitative tightening. The authors find that announcements of QT have a small but statistically significant effect in increasing government bond yields—about 4 to 8 basis points. But this effect is much smaller, in absolute terms, than the prevailing estimates of the decrease in yields from announcements of QE. The conclusion is that the interest rate effects of QE and QT are asymmetric. For an economist, this result may seem puzzling—why would changing the sign on an action lead to asymmetric effects on prices and real variables? Ever since central banks initiated QE in response to the Global Financial Crisis, academics have debated its effectiveness. One view is that it has a very limited effect in situations where a central bank is swapping zero interest-bearing reserves for zero interest-bearing shorter-term Treasury securities. Because the two assets would seem to be nearly perfect substitutes, there can be no price effects from altering the composition of the two assets. The central bank is simply swapping two $10 bills for a twenty. If this is true, then undoing the trade via QT has no effect either. It should be symmetrical. The alternative view, based on market segmentation or preferred habitat theory, is that when a central bank uses reserves to pay for government securities, it is decreasing the supply of these securities to private investors, which will bid up the price and lower the interest rate on government securities.2By lowering interest rates on longer-maturity assets, which pay a higher interest rate than reserves, the central bank can stimulate the economy in a manner similar to lowering the policy rate. But by this logic, when QT reverses QE, asset prices should fall and yields should rise in equal magnitude. Thus, any positive effects derived from QE would be reversed when QT occurs. This suggests that QE and QT may cancel each other out in welfare terms. But if there are no net benefits from the action, what is the point of doing it? To illustrate this point, suppose someone is given a weight-loss drug and they lose 80 pounds, but then the drug is taken away and they regain the 80 pounds. What was the point of the exercise if there was no net welfare gain? To me, for QE to be beneficial on net, therehasto be asymmetry in the effects of QE relative to QT. My thinking on this has long been guided by the conclusions of a paper I wrote with Alex Berentsen about optimal stabilization policy, which is what QE and QT ultimately should be about.3The gist of the argument is that when shocks and frictions to trading arise suddenly, the central bank can take actions such as injecting reserves to ease trading frictions or credit constraints and improve welfare. But by waiting until the frictions and shocks dissipate before undoing the injections, the positive effects are not reversed. As an example, when a house is on fire, pouring water on the fire will put it out, which has great benefits for all. But when the fire is out, draining the water away does not reignite the fire—the initial benefits are not undone. The punchline here is that QE is conducted under different market conditions than those that occur when QT is done, so it is not surprising that the effects will be different. The authors' findings that QE has asymmetric effects compared to QT is not a puzzle but an indication that central banks timed QE and QT in the right manner such that society was better off. The Execution of Quantitative Easing versus Quantitative TighteningTurning to the impact of QE and QT on interest rates, analysis often focuses on the term premium. There are three key elements of asset purchases that change the term premium: (1) the expected path of QE, which includes the amount and timing of purchases; (2) the length of time the central bank is expected to hold the additional securities; and (3) the expected path of QT, including the amount and timing of redemptions, which importantly depends on the desired ultimate size of securities holdings (and reserve balances) of the central bank. As soon as an asset purchase program is announced, these expectations are formed, resulting in the term premium effect, or TPE, on interest rates. Over time, the TPE will change, based on both the passage of time and any updates to the public's expectations for the components I just mentioned. Let me talk about three factors that affect both the expected path of asset purchases and interest rates. These factors are things to keep in mind for future policy decisions. First, there are two ways that QE can be implemented, and they have different impacts on interest rates. These are what I callclosed- oropen-endedQE programs. Closed-ended QE programs involve an announcement of a fixed stock of purchases over a fixed period of time. An example of this type of asset purchase program was initiated by the Fed in March 2009.4Open-ended QE simply gives a purchase amount per month but no calendar endpoint, so the expected size of the program is unspecified. A set of economic conditions for reducing or ending purchases may be stipulated, but when they will occur is not perfectly predictable. Here, one can think of the Fed's most recent asset purchase program. At the time of an asset purchase announcement, it will be easier for markets to fully price in a closed-ended program, since its purchase amount and end date are given, whereas the open-ended program's pricing will depend on market expectations for the evolution of the economy. So if one wants a particular impact on interest rates at the announcement date, one might lean toward a closed-ended program or be aware that additional guidance on the expected path of the open-ended program will be needed. As time passes and the economy evolves, the two programs work differently. One might prefer an open-ended program over time because it dynamically responds to the evolution of economic conditions. The program could be halted or extended as conditions improve or worsen, unlike a closed-ended program. But, of course, the criteria set in the open-ended program must be carefully considered. As I said in a recent FEDS Note and in several speeches, the 2020 criteria for when to begin QT may have been too restrictive and did not allow the Committee to taper as soon and as gradually as desired.5Setting the appropriate criteria ahead of time to create the flexibility needed to respond to changing economic and financial conditions is very hard to do. The second factor affecting the path of asset purchases is that it is very important that QE be credibly followed by QT. If QE is viewed as nothing more than a permanent injection of money into the economy, it would likely create inflation. This was widely predicted back in 2009, but the inflation didn't happen. Why? In my view, it didn't happen because the Fed credibly committed to withdrawing the injected reserves at a later date. Pre-committing to QT is what allows the injection of reserves into the economy without inflation or other longer-run distortions of market pricing. So when starting asset purchases or weighing how to approach asset runoff or sales, it is important that the central bank commit to normalizing its balance sheet. The third factor is that it is important for a central bank to move carefully as it comes to the end of QT and the desired level of ample reserves. The endpoint should be related to the expectation of the banking system's demand for reserves. In the United States, we saw stresses in money markets in the fall of 2019, when the Fed reduced the level of reserves during balance sheet normalization through July and then there was heavy issuance of Treasury securities in September. The level of reserves likely went a bit too low.6Learning from our experiences and trying to understand how the demand for reserves has changed over time suggests moving carefully toward the endpoint of QT. For this reason, even if QE is an open-ended program, QT is more likely to resemble a closed-ended program. Central banks usually have an idea of how large they want their balance sheet to be when QT ends; therefore, once the pace of QT is announced, markets should be able to effectively price in the entire program at the announcement of the plan. After that, the actual execution of QT is simply validating the beliefs that market participants had at the announcement. This is why many refer to QT as merely draining unneeded reserves, which should be as interesting as watching paint dry. Quantitative Tightening in the United StatesLet me now turn more directly to the authors' paper and two of their findings. First, as I mentioned earlier, they find central banks' QT announcements have only a small effect on interest rates. To conduct this analysis, the authors do an event study around QT announcements, which requires them to identify "surprises" in the QT announcements. As the authors acknowledge, this is not a trivial exercise. My comment here is to point out why identifying a QT announcement surprise is challenging when considering examples in the United States. Let me walk through the evolution of the Fed's QT communications in the spring of 2022 to consider how various communications affected the expected path of QT.7Recall that QE ended in March 2022.8Heading into April, it was likely that markets expected a redemption path somewhat like the Fed's 2017–2019 QT plan.9That plan phased in redemptions over 12 months and ultimately allowed, at most, $30 billion of Treasury securities and $20 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to be redeemed each month. On April 5, 2022, then-Vice Chair Lael Brainard gave a speech that noted the balance sheet would shrink considerably more rapidly than in the previous case of QT; specifically, she said that "significantly larger caps and a much shorter period to phase in the maximum caps compared with 2017–2019."10The next day, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) minutes provided additional information on the expected maximum monthly caps and phase-in period, saying participants generally agreed to a three-month phase-in and caps of $60 billion and $35 billion for Treasury securities and agency MBS, respectively. Over those two days in April, the markets likely updated their expected QT plans to have sooner and larger redemptions. This change would be associated with a less negative term premium effect, meaning a rise in Treasury yields. The 10-year Treasury yield rose 19 basis points over the two days of the Vice Chair's speech and the FOMC minutes—that is, 12 basis points on the day of her speech and another 7 basis points on the day of the FOMC minutes—and a total of 37 basis points over that week. About a month later, on May 4, 2022, the FOMC communicated its "Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet." The plan was consistent with the FOMC minutes from April, and there was little change in the 10-year Treasury yield that day and week (negative 4 basis points on the day of the announcement and 2 basis points over the five-day period). So, when doing event studies, it may be difficult to estimate the full impact of QT announcements by simply looking at the formal announcement of the QT plan. Let me turn to a second point of the paper, about which types of investors have increased their securities holdings as the Fed has reduced its holdings. When a central bank steps away from asset purchases and begins to shrink its balance sheet, a common question is, who will step in and take the central bank's place in buying securities? I always respond by saying, "Why is this important?" If the government bond market is broad and deep, there will be plenty of buyers—there is no need to worry about who will buy the government debt. If the government bond market is not broad or deep, however, then the central bank's actions can have adverse and unwanted effects on prices and market functioning. This would then affect how fast the central bank can reduce its balance sheet and whether it can do so passively or actively. One could also argue that it matters because knowing the buyers helps one understand the transmission of QT to asset prices and interest rates. Does it matter if it is banks or nonbank financial firms that are doing the buying? Does it matter if it is hedge funds, pension funds, or actual households doing the buying? One needs to have a better understanding of why the question is being asked before one can fully understand the answers to the question. The authors focus on the reduction in aggregate securities holdings of central banks and find that households and broker-dealers are the main investors absorbing the redeemed securities. For my discussion today, I decided to dig a bit deeper into the Financial Accounts of the United States in two ways. First, I decided to look at each type of security (Treasury securities and agency MBS) individually.11For Treasury securities, I also find that since the 2022 start of QT, households have boosted their market share the most, and broker-dealers have also increased their share. For agency MBS, not only has the market shares of those two investor types increased, but so has the market shares of money market funds. Second, I dug into the household category a bit more. As currently categorized, the Financial Accounts household category includes hedge funds. The Federal Reserve Board is working to segregate hedge funds in this data set. In the interim, the Board publishes separate data on the balance sheets of domestic hedge funds.12Using this supplemental data, I find that it is not the hedge funds that are responsible for the increase in household market share. This means the increase is driven by the other household investors: actual households and nonprofit organizations. What do I make of this finding? My interpretation is that it reinforces the view that the demand for U.S. Treasury securities is broad and deep—the buyers are not a narrow set of deep-pocketed, sophisticated investors but rather the American public. As a result, the pace of runoff is not a problem. As we have seen with the current phase of QT, runoff up to $95 billion a month is not causing substantial strains in financial markets—something that a few years ago would have surprised a lot of people, given the worries about QT that were common prior to 2022. NormalizationLet me conclude with a few comments on where I believe the Fed should be heading as it continues to normalize its balance sheet. By "normalizing" I mean reducing the size of the balance sheet but retaining enough assets to manage monetary policy using an ample-reserves regime. As the Federal Reserve continues its QT program, I support further thinking about how many more securities to redeem. We have an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility with take-up of more than $500 billion, and I view these funds as excess liquidity that financial market participants do not want, so this tells me that we can continue to reduce our holdings for some time. In addition, it is important to remember that we now have a standing repurchase agreement facility (SRF). The SRF serves as a backstop in money markets, since it takes in Treasury securities as well as agency MBS and puts reserves in the banking system. This facility may allow banks to lower the level of reserves below what reserves would be without the facility, and it may provide a signal for when reserves are getting close to ample. Chair Powell has noted that the FOMC will begin to discuss slowing our redemptions at our FOMC meeting this month, which will help us transition into whatever definition of "ample" we deem appropriate. Changing our pace of redemptions will occur when the Committee makes a decision to do so, and the timing will be independent of any changes to the policy rate target. Balance sheet plans are about getting liquidity levels right and approaching "ample" at the correct speed. They do not imply anything about the stance of interest rate policy, which is focused on influencing the macroeconomy and achieving our dual mandate. Thinking about longer-term issues related to the Fed's portfolio, I want to mention two things. First, I would like to see the Fed's agency MBS holdings go to zero. Agency MBS holdings have been slow to run off the portfolio, at a recent monthly average of about $15 billion, because the underlying mortgages have very low interest rates and prepayments are quite small. I believe it is important to see a continued reduction in these holdings. Second, I would like to see a shift in Treasury holdings toward a larger share of shorter-dated Treasury securities. Prior to the Global Financial Crisis, we held approximately one-third of our portfolio in Treasury bills.13Today, bills are less than 5 percent of our Treasury holdings and less than 3 percent of our total securities holdings. Moving toward more Treasury bills would shift the maturity structure more toward our policy rate—the overnight federal funds rate—and allow our income and expenses to rise and fall together as the FOMC increases and cuts the target range. This approach could also assist a future asset purchase program because we could let the short-term securities roll off the portfolio and not increase the balance sheet.14This is an issue the FOMC will need to decide in the next couple of years. In conclusion, let me be clear that this is a great paper that will serve as a major reference for researchers and central banks. The authors' analysis will surely have a much longer shelf life than my discussion of it. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. There are several theories for how QE works. The market segmentation theory suggests that assets of different maturities are imperfect substitutes, so a lower supply of long-term assets and a higher supply of short-term assets would imply that long-term interest rates fall and short-term interest rates rise. The preferred habitat theory suggests that financial market participants prefer certain asset maturities over others and the price (or interest) rate needs to adjust to change their desired mix of holdings.Return to text 3. For details of the model and results, see Aleksander Berentsen and Christopher Waller (2011), "Price-Level Targeting and Stabilization Policy,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 43, Supplement 2 (October), pp. 559–80.Return to text 4. An example of a closed-ended program is from March 2009, when the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) noted that "to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months"; see paragraph 3 of the March 2009 FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. An example of an open-ended program is from December 2020, when the FOMC stated it would keep buying $120 billion per month in securities "until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee's maximum employment and price stability goals"; see paragraph 4 of the December 2020 FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.Return to text 5. See Jane Ihrig and Chris Waller (2024), "The Federal Reserve's Responses to the Post-COVID Period of High Inflation," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 14).Return to text 6. For a discussion of the September 2019 experience, see Sriya Anbil, Alyssa Anderson, and Zeynep Senyuz (2020), "What Happened in Money Markets in September 2019?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 27).Return to text 7. Prior to the spring announcements, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) began discussions on policy normalization as reported in the December 2021 FOMC minutes. It was noted that some participants observed that the balance sheet could potentially shrink faster than the previous experience. The 10-year Treasury yield moved up several basis points around the release of the minutes.Return to text 8. In March 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) indicated that it "expects to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at a coming meeting"; see paragraph 3 of the March 2022 FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. This language signaled the Fed would be holding the peak amount of securities on its balance sheet for just a short period of time, which turned out to be between March and the end of May.Return to text 9. In January 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee provided a statement on "Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet," but it did not provide information about the timing or pace of redemptions; the statement is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20220126c.htm.Return to text 10. See Lael Brainard (2022), "Variation in the Inflation Experiences of Households," speech delivered at the Spring 2022 Institute Research Conference, Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, April 5.Return to text 11. My calculations look at how investor types' market shares change over time, as is done in Seth Carpenter, Selva Demiralp, Jane Ihrig, and Elizabeth Klee (2015), "Analyzing Federal Reserve Asset Purchases: From Whom Does the Fed Buy?"Journal of Banking and Finance,vol. 52 (March), pp. 230–44.Return to text 12. Data on the balance sheet of hedge funds is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/20231207/html/b101f.htm.Return to text 13. A Treasury bill is a security backed by the U.S. Treasury Department with a maturity of up to 52 weeks. A bill is sold at a discount, and at maturity the investor receives the par value of the security.Return to text 14. There may be other considerations for holding a sizable share of bills in the Fed's portfolio. For example, Vissing-Jorgensen (2023) argues for considering the convenience yield impact of bills; see Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2023), "Balance Sheet Policy above the ELB," paper presented at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, held in Sintra, Portugal, June 26–28.Return to text