The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on Wednesday announced that they are extending the resolution plan submission deadline for certain large financial institutions. These companies will be required to submit their resolution plans by March 31, 2025, instead of July 1, 2024. By law, certain large financial institutions must periodically submit resolution plans to the agencies. These resolution plans, also known as "living wills," must describe a company's strategy for orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. In August of last year, the agencies invited public comment onproposed guidancefor how the resolution plans of certain large financial institutions could address key challenges in resolution. The agencies indicated that they were considering providing an extension of the next resolution plan submission date to provide reasonable time for the proposed guidance, once finalized, to be reflected in the plan submissions. The public comment period closed November 30, 2023, and the agencies continue to develop the final guidance. Attachment (PDF) Statement by Governor Bowman
Governor Christopher J. Waller At The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Thank you, David Wessel, and thank you to Brookings for the opportunity to speak to you today. In the second half of 2023, I gave a series of speeches about the apparent conflict between the strength of economic activity in the third quarter and continued progress toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation goal.1I said then that "something's got to give"—either activity needs to moderate, or progress on lowering inflation is going to stop. By late November, the latest economic data left me encouraged that there were signs of moderating economic activity in the fourth quarter, but inflation was still too high. As of today, the data has come in even better. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is expected to have grown between 1 and 2 percent in the fourth quarter, unemployment is still below 4 percent, and core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation has been running close to 2 percent for the last 6 months. For a macroeconomist, this is almost as good as it gets. But will it last? Time will tell whether inflation can be sustained on its recent path and allow us to conclude that we have achieved the FOMC's price-stability goal. Time will tell if this can happen while the labor market still performs above expectations. The data we have received the last few months is allowing the Committee to consider cutting the policy rate in 2024. However, concerns about the sustainability of these data trends requires changes in the path of policy to be carefully calibrated and not rushed. In the end, I am feeling more confident that the economy can continue along its current trajectory. Let me start with the data on economic activity that has brought me to this view, and then I'll talk about the labor market, financial conditions, and inflation. I'll conclude with what I think the implications are from all that for monetary policy. First, economic activity has moderated. After averaging an annualized 3 percent over the first three quarters of 2023, and 5 percent in the third quarter, growth in real GDP appears to have slowed appreciably in the fourth quarter. The average of private-sector forecasts summarized by the Blue Chip survey estimates that real GDP grew 1.5 percent in the final three months of 2023. The Atlanta Fed's GDP Now model, based on data in hand, currently stands at 2.2 percent. An important part of that moderation comes from business investment and government spending, both of which showed rapid growth earlier in 2023 that didn't appear sustainable. Consumer spending also accounted for much of the surprising strength in GDP growth earlier in the year, but here the slowdown so far appears more tentative. Factors such as high interest rates, a depletion of excess savings, and a pickup in credit card usage all portend slower growth ahead, but it is unclear how much of that slowing has already occurred. Since consumer spending accounts for more than two-thirds of GDP, this component of demand is obviously critical for the outlook. We'll find out more about consumer spending tomorrow from the report on December's retail sales. Turning to the labor market, over the course of 2023, there have been increases in labor supply amid slowing demand for labor, and I expect this to continue to bring the labor market into better balance. Some have seen the latest jobs report as in conflict with this story, so let me explain why I don't see it that way. The short version is that I see the surprises in the December jobs report as largely noise against a trend of ongoing moderation that supports progress toward 2 percent inflation. The unemployment rate in December held steady at 3.7 percent while employers added 216,000 jobs, which was more than expected and an increase from the 173,000 created in November and 105,000 in October. While that looks like a modest acceleration in job creation, I remind myself that revisions to monthly payrolls have been downward for most of 2023—from the first to the third estimate employment gains were revised down in 9 of 10 job reports. Given this recent history of revisions, there is a good chance December will be revised down. Furthermore, with growth expectations moderating over coming quarters, employment gains are likely to slow. We can see that this is already happening if we look at progress over the previous quarters. Average monthly payroll gains over the fourth quarter were 165,000, a step down from the 221,000 average in the third quarter and 257,000 in the first half of 2023. This data shows an improving balance between labor supply and demand. Likewise, an uptick in wage growth last month should be viewed over a longer time horizon. Average hourly earnings rose 0.4 percent in December, as they did in November, and the 3- and 12-month increases ticked up. But over the course of the fourth quarter, wages rose less than they did in the third quarter, and over the past several quarters I see a moderation in wage increases across various measures of labor compensation that I expect will be consistent with ongoing progress toward 2 percent inflation. And, though there was a drop in labor force participation in December, the fourth-quarter average is higher than it was in 2022. These are all signs that the labor market continues to come into better balance. Meanwhile, data on job openings indicates ongoing moderation in labor demand. Job openings played a prominent role in my thinking over the last two years about how restrictive monetary policy aimed at bringing down inflation will impact labor demand and unemployment. One can think of total labor demand as being the sum of the number of workers employed and the number of workers that firms want to hire. The latter is best measured by posted job vacancies. If labor demand declines, the question is: Will employment bear the brunt of the reduction in demand or will vacancies absorb the impact? Traditional Phillips curve analysis assumes that employment would bear the brunt and as a result, unemployment would rise significantly from a tightening of monetary policy. History has shown that this is not an unreasonable assumption, particularly when the job vacancy rate is below 4.5 percent. But in the spring of 2022, the vacancy rate peaked around 7.5 percent with nearly 12 million job vacancies, and there were still about 6 million unemployed workers. It just seemed counterintuitive to me that with that many job openings and so few people looking for work that the first thing a firm would do when labor demand softened would be to lay off workers. My economic instinct was that this time things would be different and that vacancies would absorb the decline in labor demand, while employment and unemployment changed relatively little. But instinct isn't enough sometimes. One needs an economic model to verify your instinct and good data analysis is needed to quantify the theoretical impact. This is what I provided in a speech I gave in May 2022, with the help of Andrew Figura.2In that speech we described a textbook labor search model to derive a Beveridge curve, which is a theoretical relationship between job vacancies and the unemployment rate.3To quantify the effects of restrictive monetary policy on unemployment, we used standard empirical methods to calibrate the theoretical model. We showed that if restrictive monetary policy could lower the vacancy rate from 7.5 percent to 4.5 percent via a significant decline in job vacancies, there would be a relatively small increase in the unemployment rate—from 3.7 percent to 4.2 percent. Based on this analysis, we argued that, as long as the involuntary job-separation rate did not rise, restrictive monetary policy would allow the FOMC to bring inflation down without a significant increase in the unemployment rate. This seemed like a very plausible assumption given the incredibly high vacancy rate and dearth of workers looking for jobs. Our predictions contradicted standard Phillips curve analysis and historical precedent, but we were in unprecedented times in 2022. It has been nearly two years since I gave that speech. How has our prediction faired? Data received since then have supported our argument. Since March 2022, the FOMC raised the policy rate over 500 basis points and core PCE inflation has fallen substantially, especially when measured over the past six months. During this dramatic tightening of policy, the job vacancy rate fell from around 7.5 percent to 5.3 percent, which brought the ratio of job vacancies to the number of unemployed people to a touch below 1.4—down from the peak of 2 and not far from the pre-pandemic level of 1.2. The involuntary job-separation rate has remained essentially unchanged at 1 percent since April 2022. Meanwhile the unemployment rate, while bouncing around a bit, is the same as it was in March 2022, 3.7 percent, which is lower than we predicted. Now, we argued that this couldn't go on forever. We showed in our research that if the vacancy rate continued to fall below 4.5 percent there would be a significant increase in the unemployment rate. So, from now on, the setting of policy needs to proceed with more caution to avoid over-tightening. But to me, this episode shows that good theory combined with good data analysis can lead to good policy outcomes, even if the predictions challenge conventional wisdom. Moving on from the labor market, another important factor affecting economic activity and progress toward the FOMC's economic objectives is financial conditions, and I wanted to give my view of where they stand. There has been a lot of focus on tightening financial conditions in the fall and then easing of conditions more recently. My view continues to be that, on net, financial conditions remain restrictive and continue to have the desired effect of being a drag on economic activity to put downward pressure on inflation. Recall that the 10-year Treasury yield peaked in mid-October around 5 percent at the time of the jump up in measured economic activity in the third quarter and shortly after a strong jobs report for September. At that point, FOMC participants still expected another rate hike in 2023. But then the data started cooling off, the FOMC's December Summary of Economic Projections indicated no more hikes, and the 10-year Treasury yield fell to around 4 percent, which is roughly where it was just after the FOMC's last rate hike in July. Remember that in July the widespread view was that financial conditions were pretty tight. I consider this to still be true today, and that judgment is supported by current readings of financial conditions indexes, which capture a broader set of financial variables.4 So let's talk about what the data on economic activity, the labor market and financial conditions mean for progress toward 2 percent inflation. The backdrop is that we made a lot of progress on inflation in 2023. The 12-month percent change in total PCE inflation, the FOMC's preferred measure for our target, fell from 5.3 percent in January to 2.6 percent in November, the latest month of data. Factoring out volatile energy and food prices, core inflation is a better guide to where inflation is going, and core PCE inflation fell from 5 percent in January to 3.2 percent in November. With inflation declining over the course of the year, I like to look at 3- and 6-month measures to have a better understanding of the current level of inflation. As I noted earlier, the 6-month change in core inflation has been hovering close to a 2 percent annual rate, as has the 3-month measure. Data on inflation for December was released last week for the consumer price index (CPI) and producer price index. CPI inflation for both total and core rose 0.3 percent for the month. Producer price index (PPI) inflation numbers reported a continued decline in those prices. Some of the PPI data feed into December PCE inflation, and private sector forecasts suggest that the monthly core PCE reading will be 0.2 percent. If those forecasts hold true, then core PCE inflation in December will remain close to 2 percent, when measured on a 3-month or 6-month basis. PCE inflation of 2 percent is our goal, but that goal cannot be achieved for just a moment in time. It must be sustained at a level of 2 percent. As I said earlier, based on economic activity and the cooling of the labor market, I am becoming more confident that we are within striking distance of achieving a sustainable level of 2 percent PCE inflation. I think we are close, but I will need more information in the coming months confirming or (conceivably) challenging the notion that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our inflation goal. This brings me to the implications for monetary policy. The progress I have noted on inflation, combined with the data in hand on economic and financial conditions and my outlook has made me more confident than I have been since 2021 that inflation is on a path to 2 percent. While the emphasis of policy since that time has been on pushing down inflation, given the strength of the current labor market the FOMC's focus now is likely to be more balanced: keeping inflation on a 2 percent path while also keeping employment near its maximum level. Today, I view the risks to our employment and inflation mandates as being more closely balanced. I will be watching for sustained progress on inflation and modest cooling in the labor market that does not harm the economy. I believe policy is set properly. It is restrictive and should continue to put downward pressure on demand to allow us to continue to see moderate inflation readings. So, as I said, I believe we are on the right track to achieve 2 percent inflation. As long as inflation doesn't rebound and stay elevated, I believe the FOMC will be able to lower the target range for the federal funds rate this year. This view is consistent with the FOMC's economic projections in December, in which the median projection was three 25-basis-point cuts in 2024. Clearly, the timing of cuts and the actual number of cuts in 2024 will depend on the incoming data. Risks that would delay or dampen my expectation for cuts this year are that economic activity that seems to have moderated in the fourth quarter of 2023 does not play out; that the balance of supply and demand in the labor market, which improved over 2023, stops improving or reverses; and that the gains on moderating inflation evaporate. One piece of data I will be watching closely is the scheduled revisions to CPI inflation due next month. Recall that a year ago, when it looked like inflation was coming down quickly, the annual update to the seasonal factors erased those gains. In mid-February, we will get the January CPI report and revisions for 2023, potentially changing the picture on inflation. My hope is that the revisions confirm the progress we have seen, but good policy is based on data and not hope. When the time is right to begin lowering rates, I believe it can and should be lowered methodically and carefully. In many previous cycles, which began after shocks to the economy either threatened or caused a recession, the FOMC cut rates reactively and did so quickly and often by large amounts. This cycle, however, with economic activity and labor markets in good shape and inflation coming down gradually to 2 percent, I see no reason to move as quickly or cut as rapidly as in the past. The healthy state of the economy provides the flexibility to lower the (nominal) policy rate to keep the real policy rate at an appropriate level of tightness. But I will end by repeating that the timing and number of rate cuts will be driven by the incoming data. Thank you. 1. See Christopher J. Waller (2023), "Something's Got to Give," speech delivered at the Distinguished Speaker Seminar, European Economics and Financial Center, London, October 18, and "Something Appears to Be Giving," speech delivered at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C., November 28. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller (2022), "Responding to High Inflation, with Some Thoughts on a Soft Landing," speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability (IMFS) Distinguished Lecture, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, May 30.Return to text 3. See Figura and Waller (2022)."What does the Beveridge curve tell us about the likelihood of a soft landing?,"FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 29, 2022.Return to text 4. For example, the movement of Goldman Sachs' Financial Conditions Index looks a lot like that of the 10-year Treasury yield and is close to its levels in July. The Federal Reserve's Financial Conditions Impulse on Growth index also shows a downward movement from its peak earlier in 2023, and its level continues to suggest that conditions are a headwind to economic activity.Return to text
The Federal Reserve Board on Monday announced five new members of its Community Advisory Council, or CAC. The CAC is composed of a diverse group of experts and representatives of consumer, workforce, and community development organizations and interests. CAC members provide information, advice, and recommendations to the Board on relevant policy matters and emerging issues of interest. The five new members of the CAC were selected from a pool of individuals who applied after the Board's call for applications. These members will replace: former Chair Dan Betancourt; Darlene Lombos; Laura Murillo; Arjan Schutte; and Kendra Smith, whose terms concluded at the end of 2023. Each new member will serve a three-year term. The new members of the CAC are: Roberto GallardoVice President for Engagement & Associate Professor, Agricultural Economics, Purdue UniversityWest Lafayette, Indiana Renata B. KowalczykCEO, Wilmington AllianceWilmington, Delaware Jose QuinonezCEO, Mission Asset FundSan Francisco, California Bruce SchultzVice President, Community Development Banking Strategy, Gateway First BankTulsa, Oklahoma Justin SlatteryExecutive Director, Belknap Economic Development CouncilLaconia, New Hampshire These individuals will join ten existing members and will be led by incoming Chair Christie McCravy and incoming Vice Chair Carlos Contreras. The Council is scheduled to meet May 29 and October 10, 2024. Records of previous meetings are foundhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced four new members of its Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC), and the president and vice president of the council for 2024. The CDIAC advises the Board on the economy, lending conditions, and other issues of interest to community depository institutions. Members are selected from representatives of commercial banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions serving on local advisory councils at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks and serve three-year terms. One member of each of the Reserve Bank councils serves on the CDIAC, which meets twice a year with the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C. Chuck Sulerzyski, president and chief executive officer of Peoples Bank, Marietta, Ohio, will serve as CDIAC president in 2024. Kim DeVore, president and chief executive officer of Jonah Bank of Wyoming, Casper, Wyo., will serve as vice president. The four new CDIAC members will replace former members from the Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and San Francisco districts. The Council is scheduled to meet April 11 and November 14, 2024. Further information on the CDIAC, including records from their meetings with the Board, can be foundhere. The new members of CDIAC in 2024: Ronald JusticePresident and Chief Executive OfficerThe State BankFenton, Mich. Agnes Catherine NgoChair of Central Pacific Financial Corp.Central Pacific BankHonolulu, Hawaii Jeffrey A. StopkoPresident and Chief Executive OfficerAmeriServ Financial Inc.Johnstown, Pa. Anne P. TangenPresident and Chief Executive OfficerBankFiveFall River, Mass. The other members of CDIAC in 2024: Daniel P. BerryPresident and Chief Executive OfficerDuke University Federal Credit UnionDurham, N.C. Dylan S. ClarksonPresident and Chief Executive OfficerPioneer Bank & TrustSpearfish, S.D. Tyler K. ClinchChief Executive Officer and PresidentFirst Community Bank of East TennesseeKingsport, Tenn. Luanne CundiffPresident and Chief Executive OfficerFirst State Bank of St. CharlesSt. Charles, Mo. Tracy HarrisPresident and Chief Executive OfficerNational Bank and TrustLa Grange, Texas James S. VaccaroChair, President, and Chief Executive OfficerManasquan BankWall Township, N.J. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Board on Monday announced that it will extend until May 12, 2024, the comment period on its interchange fee proposal. The Board extended the comment period to allow the public more time to analyze the proposal and prepare their comments. Comments on the proposal were originally due by February 12, 2024. Separately, the Board published additional data related to the interchange fee cap. The Board published the data to give the public additional information as they consider the proposal. The additional data are availablehere. Interchange fees are paid by merchants and received by debit card issuers for each debit card transaction. In October 2023, the Board requested comment on a proposal to lower the maximum interchange fee that a large debit card issuer can receive for a debit card transaction. The proposal would also establish a regular process for updating the maximum amount every other year going forward. By law, the Board is required to establish standards for assessing whether an interchange fee received by a large debit card issuer for processing a debit card transaction is reasonable and proportional to certain issuer costs. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing; Extension of Comment Period
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday released preliminary financial information for the Federal Reserve Banks' income and expenses in 2023. The 2023 audited Reserve Bank financial statements are expected to be published in coming months and may include adjustments to these preliminary unaudited results. Information related to the 2023 preliminary financial results for the Reserve Banks include: The Federal Reserve Act requires the Reserve Banks to remit excess earnings to the U.S. Treasury after providing for operating costs, payments of dividends, and an amount necessary to maintain surplus. During a period when earnings are not sufficient to provide for those costs, a deferred asset is recorded. In 2023, the Reserve Banks increased the deferred asset by $116.4 billion resulting in a cumulative deferred asset at year-end of $133.0 billion. The deferred asset is the amount of net excess earnings these Reserve Banks will need to realize before their remittances to the U.S. Treasury resume. A deferred asset has no implications for the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy or its ability to meet its financial obligations. The attached chart illustrates the amount the Reserve Banks distributed to the U.S. Treasury from 2014 through 2023 (estimated). For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday announced that the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP) will cease making new loans as scheduled on March 11. The program will continue to make loans until that time and is available as an additional source of liquidity for eligible institutions. During a period of stress last spring, the Bank Term Funding Program helped assure the stability of the banking system and provide support for the economy. After March 11, banks and other depository institutions will continue to have ready access to the discount window to meet liquidity needs. As the program ends, the interest rate applicable to new BTFP loans has been adjusted such that the rate on new loans extended from now through program expiration will be no lower than the interest rate on reserve balances in effect on the day the loan is made. This rate adjustment ensures that the BTFP continues to support the goals of the program in the current interest rate environment. This change is effective immediately. All other terms of the program are unchanged. The BTFP was established under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, with approval of the Treasury Secretary. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Term Sheet: Bank Term Funding Program (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced the designation of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks for 2024. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The Board of Governors in Washington appoints three of these directors and each year designates one of its appointees as Chair and a second as Deputy Chair. The Board also updated statistical tables on itswebsiteabout the gender and race/ ethnicity of Reserve Bank boards of directors and about the sectors represented by those directors. Similar details about Reserve Bank Branch boards of directors will be published in the coming weeks. Following are the names of the Chairs and Deputy Chairs designated by the Board for 2024: BostonCorey Thomas, chairman and chief executive officer, Rapid7, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts, renamed Chair. Roger W. Crandall, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, Springfield, Massachusetts, renamed Deputy Chair. New YorkVincent Alvarez, president, New York City Central Labor Council, AFL-CIO, New York, New York, renamed Chair. Pat Wang, president and chief executive officer, Healthfirst, New York, New York, named Deputy Chair. PhiladelphiaAnthony Ibarguen, chief executive officer, Quench USA, Inc., King of Prussia, Pennsylvania, renamed Chair. Sharmain Matlock-Turner, chief executive officer, Urban Affairs Coalition, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, renamed Deputy Chair. ClevelandHeidi L. Gartland, chief government and community relations officer, University Hospitals, Cleveland, Ohio, named Chair. Richard Kramer, chairman, chief executive officer, and president, Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., Akron, Ohio named Deputy Chair. RichmondJodie W. McLean, chief executive officer, EDENS, Washington, D.C., renamed Chair. Lisa M. Hamilton, president and chief executive officer, The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Baltimore, Maryland, renamed Deputy Chair. AtlantaClaire Lewis Arnold, chief executive officer, Leapfrog Services, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, renamed Chair. Gregory A. Haile, former president, Broward College, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, renamed Deputy Chair. ChicagoJennifer F. Scanlon, president and chief executive officer, UL Solutions Inc., Northbrook, Illinois, renamed Chair. Juan Salgado, chancellor, City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, renamed Deputy Chair. St. LouisCarolyn Chism Hardy, president and chief executive officer, Chism Hardy Investments, LLC, Bartlett, Tennessee, named Chair. Lal Karsanbhai, president and chief executive officer, Emerson Electric Co., St. Louis, Missouri, named Deputy Chair. MinneapolisChris Hilger, chairman, president, and chief executive officer, Securian Financial, St. Paul, Minnesota, named Chair. Paul D. Williams, president and chief executive officer, Project for Pride in Living, Minneapolis, Minnesota, named Deputy Chair. Kansas CityPatrick A. Dujakovich, president, Greater Kansas City AFL-CIO, Kansas City, Missouri, renamed Chair. Jandel Allen-Davis, M.D., president and chief executive officer, Craig Hospital, Englewood, Colorado, named Deputy Chair. DallasThomas J. Falk, retired chairman and chief executive officer, Kimberly-Clark Corporation, Dallas, Texas, renamed Chair. Claudia Aguirre, president and chief executive officer, BakerRipley, Houston, Texas, renamed Deputy Chair. San FranciscoDavid P. White, chief executive officer, 3CG Ventures, and former national executive director, Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA), Los Angeles, California, named Chair. Russell A. Childs, chief executive officer and president, SkyWest, Inc., St. George, Utah, named Deputy Chair. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday issued an enforcement action and fined the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd. and its New York branch approximately $2.4 million for their unauthorized use and disclosure of confidential supervisory information. Confidential supervisory information includes reports of bank examinations and other confidential communications by banking regulators. It is illegal to disclose confidential supervisory information without prior approval of the appropriate banking regulator. The Board's action is being taken in conjunction with an action by the New York Department of Financial Services, the state supervisor of the bank's New York branch. The penalties announced by the Board and the Department of Financial Services total approximately $32.4 million. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: Consent prohibition order against Andrew M. EllisonFormer employee of Community Financial Services Bank, Benton, KentuckyCoronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security, or CARES, Act loan fraud Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Consent prohibition order against John FreezeFormer employee of Bank of Jackson Hole, Jackson, WyomingMisappropriation of documents, including confidential supervisory information Consent cease and desist order and civil money penalty against Randy JohnsonFormer employee of Farmers and Merchants Savings Bank, Manchester, IowaMisappropriation of confidential bank records Consent cease and desist order and civil money penalty against Chad KelloggFormer employee of Farmers and Merchants Savings Bank, Manchester, IowaMisappropriation of confidential bank records Consent cease and desist order and civil money penalty against Jeffrey HinesFormer employee of Farmers and Merchants Savings Bank, Manchester, IowaMisappropriation of confidential bank records Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Note: On February 13, 2024, the attached Order of Prohibition against John Freeze was updated to correct a typo with its effective date. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF) Attachment 3 (PDF) Attachment 4 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on November 13 through December 13, 2023. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, call 202-452-2955 or e-mail[email protected].
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on December 12–13, 2023. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeDecember 12-13, 2023:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the South Carolina Bankers Association 2024 Community Bankers Conference, Columbia, South Carolina It is a pleasure to join you this afternoon for the South Carolina Community Bankers Conference.1I always welcome the opportunity to learn from and share my perspective with bankers on issues affecting the U.S. economy and the financial industry. Today, I will focus my discussion on monetary policy, bank regulatory reforms, the evolving standards in bank supervision, and new developments in the payments system. I look forward to learning from your insights and perspectives on these issues, particularly your views on bank supervision, regulatory reforms, and your thoughts on the direction of the economy. As we kick off the new year, it's also a good time to look back on 2023 and consider a few New Year's resolutions for the coming year. Before discussing bank regulation and supervision, I'd like to offer my thoughts on the economy and monetary policy. Our Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting in December left the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and continued the run-off of the Fed's securities holdings. Inflation data over the past six months indicate that the Committee's past policy actions are having the intended effect of bringing demand and supply into better balance. This continued progress on lowering inflation reflects a restrictive policy stance with the most recent 12-month total and core personal consumption expenditures inflation readings through November at 2.6 and 3.2 percent respectively. Employment data, though often significantly revised, continue to show signs of a tight labor market with reports of healthy job gains. The average pace of job gains has slowed over the past year, which may be a sign that labor market supply and demand are coming into better balance. The economy has remained strong even with the pace of real gross domestic product projected to moderate from the third quarter 2023 strength. Considering this progress, I voted to maintain the policy rate at its current level while we continue to monitor the incoming data and assess the implications for the inflation and economic outlook. And based on this progress, my view has evolved to consider the possibility that the rate of inflation could decline further with the policy rate held at the current level for some time. Should inflation continue to fall closer to our 2 percent goal over time, it will eventually become appropriate to begin the process of lowering our policy rate to prevent policy from becoming overly restrictive. In my view, we are not yet at that point. And important upside inflation risks remain. To the extent that both food and energy markets remain exposed to geopolitical influences, they present upside risks to inflation. There is also the risk that the recent easing in financial conditions encourages a reacceleration of growth, stalling the progress in lowering inflation, or even causing inflation to reaccelerate. Finally, there is a risk that continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation. While I do not tend to take too much signal from one report, last Friday's employment report showed continued strength in job gains and wage growth, and the labor force participation rate declined. Given these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will continue to watch the data closely—including data revisions, which have increased in magnitude and frequency since the pandemic—as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance of policy. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I will make our decisions at each meeting based on the incoming data and the implications for the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, I remain willing to raise the federal funds rate further at a future meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed. Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. Twenty-twenty-three was a particularly busy year for banking regulators. Before I dig deeper into bank regulation, I'd like to recap a few of 2023's notable banking industry events. And since we are embarking on a journey into the new year, I will conclude by offering a few ideas for New Year's resolutions for regulators to consider prioritizing for 2024. These resolutions borrow heavily from principles that I have discussed publicly a number of times in the past, but they continue to be critical in guiding my thinking and approach to regulation. And I encourage my colleagues in banking regulation and supervision to consider these ideas as we begin 2024 with a full regulatory agenda. Key Developments in 2023Twenty-twenty-three brought many significant developments in bank regulation and supervision, beginning with speculation about the now-issued proposal to finalize the Basel III "endgame" capital rules. The Basel III capital rules were designed to apply only to the largest banks with significant cross-border activities, so much of the speculation early last year focused onscope—which banks would be subject to the rules under the new proposal—andcalibration,how the capital requirements would change—whether they would increase, decrease, or remain the same. On the question of calibration, much of the speculation centered around whether regulators would propose significant increases to aggregate capital requirements or adopt a "capital neutral" approach by refining standards but keeping aggregate capital levels largely the same. The objective of having a "capital neutral" proposal seemed reasonable to many, based on the understanding that a holistic review of the capital framework was in process at the Federal Reserve Board. In March, however, priorities and focus changed. The failures of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and Signature Bank resulted in the exceedingly rare steps to invoke the systemic risk exception to guarantee all depositors of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank,2and to create the Bank Term Funding Program.3These were significant emergency actions to support and stabilize the banking system. It is important to note that the Bank Term Funding Program is scheduled to expire in mid-March of this year. Understandably, the bank failures led regulators to take a hard look at what may have been missed in our supervision and what had driven regulatory and supervisory priorities leading up to these bank failures. Several post-mortem reviews were conducted in the immediate aftermath of the failures to identify and analyze the circumstances and factors that contributed to the bank failures. Many of these reviews suffered from serious shortcomings, including compressed timeframes for completion and the significantly limited matters that were within the scope of review. Nevertheless, these reviews were, and continue to be, singularly relied upon as a basis for resetting regulatory and supervisory priorities. The findings of these limited reviews have also continued to influence proposals that had long been in the pipeline, especially those related to capital reforms. I view the remainder of last year as something akin to a regulatory tidal wave, in light of the sheer volume of regulatory initiatives considered, published, and finalized. Many were undertaken or expanded with the purported goal to help address root causes of the bank failures and banking system stress. But this also included a rulemaking agenda that at times had little to no nexus with the root causes of the failures. Without a doubt, it was a challenge to support the regulatory agenda this past year. The published capital rulemaking proposal incorporated an expansive scope, a notable shift in approach, pushing down new Basel capital requirements to all banks with over $100 billion in assets, regardless of their international activities.4At the same time, the capital proposal would substantially increase regulatory capital buffer and minimum requirements for the covered firms. In close succession, the agencies proposed new "long-term debt" requirements. This long-term debt proposal would require firms with over $100 billion in assets to issue debt at the top-tier parent level that could better absorb losses during bankruptcy, which only becomes relevant after the bank fails, not in order to prevent a failure. In part, these proposals were characterized as helping to address the root causes of the bank failures. As I've noted in the past, I think there are reasons to question whether these proposed revisions are effective and appropriately targeted and calibrated, particularly when considering that bank management and supervisory shortcomings more directly contributed to the bank failures than regulatory shortcomings. The banking agencies simply cannot regulate better or more effective supervision. We must appropriately manage our supervisory programs and teams to ensure that effective and consistent supervision is implemented within each firm and that it is effective and consistent across our regulated entities. For community banks, two of the most important developments last year were the finalization of revisions to the Community Reinvestment Act regulations, and the proposal to amend the debit interchange fee cap in the Board's Regulation II. Many in the banking industry have expressed concern with the amendments to the CRA regulations, noting among other things the increased cost and burden associated with a number of the proposed revisions and new data systems required for compliance. In addition, many raised concerns about the potential adverse consequences of the rules, which include the possibility that these rules will reduce the availability of credit in some underserved markets if banks cut back lending activities due to revisions made to assessment areas defined in the new rules.5Similarly, the proposed revisions to Regulation II have generated concern from banks directly subject to the rules, but also from exempt banks concerned that the practical effect will be to push lower interchange fees down to all debit card issuers.6 Of course, supervision also saw significant changes in 2023, with the publication of new guidance on third-party risk management applicable to all financial institutions, without tailoring or guidance to assist the smallest banks in compliance,7and climate guidance that on its face applies only to institutions with more than $100 billion in assets.8In 2023, many banks also reported very material shifts in bank examinations, with a renewed focus on interest rate risk, liquidity risk, and management, and banks continue to see ongoing changes in supervisory expectations. Many of these examination-related shifts have received little public acknowledgement or attention, in large part because the rules designed to protect confidential supervisory information frustrate visibility into structural shifts in the supervisory process. As you all know well, changes in supervisory expectations frequently come without the benefit of guidance, advance notice, or published rulemaking, and in the worst-case scenario these shifts, cloaked by the veil of supervisory opacity, can have significant financial and reputational impacts. Resolutions for 2024The new year provides a prime opportunity to reflect on the past 12 months and think about how the Federal Reserve can improve our approach. I'm sure many of us took the opportunity to reflect on recent experiences as we rang in 2024. I see the new year as a perfect time to think about how the banking regulators can implement some recent lessons learned. This very brief snapshot of the past year does not cover all of the important developments in the banking system, and the bank regulatory framework, that occurred in 2023. But it is a helpful starting point for considering the year ahead. So now, I'd like to offer three new year's resolutions for bank regulators. Prioritize Safety and SoundnessFirst, safety and soundness should be renewed as the highest priority supervisory concern. This is a regulator's greatest responsibility and ensures the safe and sound continuous operation of the financial system. Last year's stress, precipitated by the spring bank failures, validated the tenet that supervision, when implemented effectively and appropriately, is the single most effective tool to support a safe and sound banking system. In the case of SVB, supervisors failed to appreciate, appropriately identify, and mitigate the known significant, idiosyncratic risks of a business model that relied on a highly concentrated, uninsured base of depositors, and the buildup of interest rate risk without appropriate risk management. But as every banker in this room knows, concentration risk and interest rate risk are not novel or unique risks, and these good old-fashioned risks can create vulnerabilities fatal to individual institutions if not appropriately anticipated and managed. Banking regulators and supervisors at all levels of our dual banking system have long focused on these risks. Therefore, I recommend that regulators collectively resolve to renew the focus on these and other longstanding and fundamental risks to banks and the banking system. So, what should bank regulators do differently to prioritize safety and soundness? In my view, the problems in 2023 resulted from a failure to identify and prioritize the appropriate areas of risk. Instead, the focus was on broader, more qualitative, more process- and policy-oriented areas of risk. This focus resulted in a disproportionate emphasis on issues that distracted from the fundamental risks to the bank's balance sheet. Regulators often identify evolving conditions and emerging risks before they materialize as pronounced stress in the banking system. But too often, regulators fail to take appropriately decisive measures to address them. Regulators can also fall into the trap of getting distracted from core financial risks, and instead focus on issues that are tangential to statutory mandates and critical areas of responsibility. Focusing on risks that pose fewer safety and soundness concerns increases the risk that regulators miss other, more foundational and pressing areas that require more immediate attention. In my view, the new climate guidance introduced by the federal banking agencies last year effectively illustrates this lost focus. While perhaps well-intended, this guidance mandates a diversion of limited supervisory resources away from critical, near-term safety and soundness risks. Setting aside differing views about the appropriateness of the content of the guidance, the fundamental question is whether climate change is a core, present-tense risk to safety and soundness—not whether climate change is an important public policy issue. And here, the evidence suggests that climate change is not currently a prominent financial risk to the banking system. This lack of attention and focus on the most material safety and soundness risks may result from intentional policy preferences, or simply may be the product of allowing ourselves to be distracted from known, longstanding risks over calm periods of banking conditions. Whatever the cause, it comes at a significant cost, as both banks and regulators shift resources and supervisory attention away from the most pressing risks. Renewed Commitment to TailoringSecond, is a renewed commitment to our Congressionally mandated obligation to tailoring. The current bank regulatory framework relies upon a risk-based, tailored approach, which strives to fulfill the congressional mandate to tailor the prudential regulatory framework for institutions with more than $100 billion in assets by aligning regulation with risk.9As we engage in ongoing regulatory reform, we must not lose sight of the virtues of this approach, for institutions of all sizes. Tailoring helps regulators prioritize the allocation of supervisory resources to focus on the most important risks and emerging threats to the financial system. Tailoring regulations does not mean that regulators can or should ignore safety and soundness issues at smaller institutions, or that the standards for smaller institutions should not be robust. As this audience knows well,allbanks are subject to periodic examinations, capital requirements, and regulatory reporting requirements, and have regular engagement with bank examiners at the state and or federal levels. Starting with an approach that acknowledges the importance of tailoring helps us avoid the impulse to simply crank regulatory dials to their highest level for all firms (or "up to 11," like the amplifiers in the classic film,This Is Spinal Tap).10This type of approach overlooks fundamental differences in business model and asset size, while tailoring ensures that we appropriately calibrate regulations and expectations to the size, complexity, and business model of institutions. The existing capital framework provides a well-reasoned model for how this tailored approach results in appropriate requirements based on firm characteristics. The largest firms are divided into four categories based on size and complexity, with the largest and most complex firms being subject to the most stringent requirements. Regional banks, with $10 billion to $100 billion in assets, are subject to a somewhat more streamlined capital framework. And finally, the simplest rules are reserved for community banks that rely on a less complex, relationship-based business model. As this example illustrates, incorporating graduated requirements not only helps to effectively allocate limited supervisory resources, but it also avoids creating regulatory incentives that could unintentionally alter the banking landscape. For example, without tailoring, it is likely that the requirements for the largest and most complex banks would be pushed down to smaller banks that have simple, straightforward business models, either directly through changes to regulation, or indirectly through opaque supervisory expectations. This environment would create overwhelming incentives for industry consolidation, since a bank with a simple business model would be subject to and expected to comply with requirements designed for larger and more complex banks, and consolidation creates economies of scale that make it more cost‑effective to comply with these requirements. My concern is that an overbroad application of requirements—requirements that are not tailored—could become a characteristic of future regulatory reforms. The Basel capital proposal highlights this concern. While the comment period is still open until January 16, much of the feedback shared with me so far has focused on two prominent concerns: (1) that the increases to capital requirements would be significantly higher than stakeholders anticipated, and (2) that the proposal would largely "flatten" the regulatory requirements for all banks over $100 billion, creating a severe cliff effect for firms approaching or crossing that threshold. Banks within this asset range are already carefully considering the ongoing viability of remaining at an asset size near that threshold. Firms just above the threshold will face strong pressure to shrink below the threshold or to merge to achieve economies of scale to comply with the breadth and complexity of the new requirements. Firms just below the threshold will need to be very intentional about approaching it and may consider revising business strategies and activities to remain below the threshold. While the capital proposal does not directly apply to regional and community banks, all banks are affected when policymakers shift away from or deemphasize tailoring. When we fail to recognize fundamental differences among firms, there is a strong temptation to continually push down requirements designed and calibrated for larger and more complex banks, to smaller and less complex banks that cannot reasonably be expected to comply with these standards. As we look to the future and the anticipated regulatory agenda for 2024, the critical role of tailoring must be incorporated as a foundational element of these regulatory reforms. Increase TransparencyThe third and final resolution is increasing transparency in supervisory expectations. While policymakers may have different views on the decisions embedded in the regulatory framework, such as where thresholds should be set, and the calibration of different requirements, one virtue of regulation is that the requirements are spelled out in public, in advance, and in some specificity and granularity. If you are a bank, you know which regulations apply to your business model. But is this true in practice? As a banker, do you always know the standards to which you will be held prior to the examination? One of the concerning trends in 2023 were reports, including from state banking regulators, that some supervisory actions were excessive in light of the risks posed by some smaller institutions. It seems reasonable that the banking system stress played a role in tightening supervisory expectations. But we must also ensure that supervisory expectations and the resulting actions are appropriately calibrated and based on existing conditions, rather than driven by premature judgments and uncertain or unsupported supervisory predictions or assumptions. Transparency allows bankers to understand supervisory expectations in advance and work to meet those expectations. As you know, bankers have a deep commitment to operate safely and soundly but have no ability to look inside the mind of an examiner to divine that expectations have shifted. Opaque shifts in expectations can create unwelcome surprises in the examination process. These "surprises," in the form of ratings downgrades, can create significant issues for banks: they can disrupt business plans, including bank mergers and acquisitions, and create pressure on a bank to divert resources away from serving customers to addressing non-critical supervisory matters. The increasing trend of supervisory "surprises" we saw in 2023 suggests to me a shortcoming in supervisory transparency. This by no means suggests that banks should not be held to high standards. To the contrary, it means that we should hold banks to standards that are known and identifiable, and when those standards inevitably evolve over time, we should give advance notice to our regulated institutions so they can manage their businesses accordingly to ensure continued compliance. Closing ThoughtsI will conclude by expressing my appreciation for the opportunity to speak to you today. We are entering the new year at a time when significant changes to the banking system and bank regulatory framework are actively being considered. Many of these changes will have a lasting impact on banks of all sizes and their current and future customers, how banks run their businesses, and the broader U.S. economy. My hope is that you, as bankers, and other interested stakeholders play an active role in this process, by sharing your views and concerns broadly, including with regulators directly. This input provides valuable insights into the specific impacts—intended and unintended—of changes to the bank regulatory framework. Voicing your concerns enables us to identify, and where needed, address, the real-world consequences of regulatory and supervisory reforms. I certainly don't need to remind this audience that the stakes are extremely high. My sincere hope for 2024 is that policymakers have the humility to acknowledge the intended and unintended consequences of these and upcoming regulatory reform efforts, and the courage to change course, when necessary, to mitigate and minimize these consequences. The future of the banking system and the ongoing strength of the U.S. economy depend on it. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. See 12 U.S.C. § 1823(c)(4)(G).Return to text 3. See 12 U.S.C. § 343.Return to text 4. See dissenting statement, "Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman" on the proposed rule to implement the Basel III endgame agreement for large banks, news release, July 27, 2023.Return to text 5. See dissenting statement, "Statement on the Community Reinvestment Act Final Rule by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," news release, October 24, 2023.Return to text 6. See dissenting statement, "Statement on Proposed Revisions to Regulation II's Interchange Fee Cap by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," news release, October 25, 2023.Return to text 7. See dissenting statement, "Statement on Third-Party Risk Management Guidance by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," news release, June 6, 2023.Return to text 8. See dissenting statement "Statement by Governor Bowman on Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions," news release, December 2, 2022.Return to text 9. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 10.This Is Spinal Tap, directed by Rob Reiner (1984).Return to text
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr At the Conference on Measuring Cyber Risk in the Financial Services Sector, Boston, Massachusetts Thank you for the opportunity to welcome you to day two of the second annual Conference on Measuring Cyber Risk in the Financial Services Sector.1I'd like to thank the staff who organized this gathering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, and the Federal Reserve Board. Cyber threats are constantly evolving, and we can expect them to become increasingly disruptive as technology advances and our financial system becomes more interconnected. In the past few months, ransomware attacks have disrupted the ability of some financial institutions to offer a variety of banking and market services, including Treasury clearance and settlement and access to online banking and ATM operations. These incidents were resolved without significant disruption to the broader market, but they are stark reminders of the potential for cyber incidents to generate broader, even systemic risks, and the importance of addressing these risks. Cybersecurity preparedness has become increasingly important for banks. Banks must take action to uncover vulnerabilities in their systems and remedy those vulnerabilities before attacks occur. But focusing on cyber defense is not sufficient. It is important that banks also focus on resilience to successful cyber-attacks, including by developing and regularly testing business continuity plans. The Federal Reserve and other banking agencies work to make sure that banks and service providers are appropriately focused on cybersecurity and operational resilience. Supervisors will continue to reinforce the need for appropriate risk management. Reliance by banks on third-party service providers has grown considerably in recent years, and with that reliance comes the potential for greater cyber risk.2It is ultimately the responsibility of banks to manage their third-party risk, and we have historically seen gaps in this regard. Last year, together with the other bank regulatory agencies, the Federal Reserve adopted guidance on effective management of third-party risk, based on the size and complexity of the bank and nature of the third-party relationship. The guidance provides some specific examples throughout the lifecycle of a third-party relationship, which should be helpful for banks as they strengthen their management of these risks. Forums like today's conference are critical to improve how we think about and measure the presence of cyber risk in financial markets. The ability to better measure cyber risk will allow banks and supervisors to improve their understanding of the direct and indirect costs of a cyber disruption. An incident poses direct costs on an affected bank and its customers, as well as indirect costs to other market participants who are connected to the affected bank. For instance, researchers at the New York Federal Reserve Bank recently modeled how a cyber incident could be transmitted through the U.S. financial system under a variety of circumstances.3The authors estimate how the impairment of a single large bank, a group of smaller banks, or a common service provider could be transmitted through the payments system and result in significant spillovers to other banks. Spillovers to the broader financial system are estimated to be especially large when attacks are timed to maximize damage, further highlighting challenges that arise with protecting against cyber risk. In addition, the researchers estimate that the potential impact of a cyberattack is systematically greater during stressed financial conditions. This indicates that we need a deeper understanding of how cyber risk interacts with traditional challenges to financial stability.4Many of the participants in today's conference are working on research that will advance our knowledge of cyber risk and financial stability, and I am looking forward to continuing to follow work in this area. Despite progress in recent years, techniques to quantify cyber risk are still at a nascent stage, in part because of a lack of good data. Better data on cyber threats and vulnerabilities will enable us to identify and assess threats to banks and the financial system. In addition, improved data on interconnectedness between financial institutions and service providers will help identify and measure the impact of an incident on the broader financial system. The ability to quickly identify patterns, connections, and vulnerabilities will enable quick response, and may mean the difference between a controlled event and one that has a serious impact. We are supporting efforts to further study this subject through public-private coordination groups. In addition, cyber incident reporting will provide better data on the frequency, severity, and locality of cyber incidents that will enhance our collective ability to respond to these events. I am heartened to see that many of the attendees and speakers at this conference come not just from the United States, but also from around the globe. Today's globalized financial system and the global nature of cyber threats demand international coordination from both participants and regulators. In closing, I look forward to hearing more about what you all accomplish during the remainder of the conference, in furtherance of a more resilient financial system. Thank you. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. See, e.g., Kotidis, Antonis, and Stacey L. Schreft (2022). "Cyberattacks and Financial Stability: Evidence from a Natural Experiment," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-025. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Return to text 3. Thomas M. Eisenbach, Anna Kovner, and Michael Junho Lee, "Cyber risk and the U.S. financial system: A pre-mortem analysis,"Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 145, Issue 3 (September 2022): 802–826, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X21004578?via%3Dihub.Return to text 4. Thomas M. Eisenbach, Anna Kovner, and Michael Junho Lee, "When It Rains, It Pours: Cyber Risk and Financial Conditions," (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, last modified August 2023).Return to text
No content found
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Protect Main Street sponsored by the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C. (virtual) "More is better." This axiom often holds true in many respects, but experience also teaches us that there are limits. Today, I'm happy to join you here at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce to talk about proposed changes to bank capital rules in the United States and to probe the limits of the notion that "more is better" when regulators seek to apply it to bank capital requirements.1 In July 2023, the federal banking agencies proposed changes to implement the Basel III "endgame" capital reforms.2The published capital rulemaking proposal incorporated an expansive scope and a notable shift in approach by pushing down new Basel capital requirements to all banks with over $100 billion in assets, regardless of their international activities. The proposal would substantially increase regulatory capital buffer and minimum capital requirements for the covered firms. The comment period closed yesterday, January 16th. We've seen a robust response from commenters, with a large number of comments submitted during the latter part of the comment period. As a policymaker, I am pleased to see the careful attention stakeholders have paid to this proposal and the thoughtful feedback that has been provided during the comment period. Public input should help to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposal. From my perspective, given the significant response from a number of industries and perspectives, as a bank regulatory policymaker, the agencies are obligated to think carefully about the best path forward for this proposal. This should include making substantive changes to address known deficiencies with the proposal and giving the public an opportunity to comment on any reformulated proposal, to ensure the best possible outcome for the Basel capital reforms. That path should ensure that sufficient consideration is given to the wide-reaching consequences of capital reform to the U.S. banking industry, the U.S. economy, and, importantly, U.S. businesses. We should consider tradeoffs in addressing scope, calibration, and tailoring. And we should appropriately adjust the excessive calibrations and eliminate regulatory overreach in the proposed rule. Today, I'd like to briefly discuss what I see as the consequences of miscalibration of capital reforms—and testing the "more is better" principle—through a discussion of the impacts of finalizing the proposed capital reforms without significant revisions. I will then outline ideas for a path forward and highlight what I see as the two most pressing problems in the proposal, issues that we must address before finalizing these and other pending rules. And finally, at the risk of lulling those to sleep who do not eat, drink, and breathe bank capital rules 24/7, I will identify a few important technical issues for resolution because they lead into the two overarching problems that I referenced a moment ago. Considerations in Capital PolicyCapital plays a critical role in the U.S. banking system, promoting the safe and sound operation of banks and supporting confidence in the broader banking system. Capital helps banks provide financial products and services, including credit, that support American businesses. I think we can all agree that higher levels of capital enhance financial resilience—up to a point. At the time of a bank's failure, capital—especially common equity capital, as the first type of funding to absorb losses—protects depositors and other creditors. Capital allows banks to continue providing products and services, promoting a well-functioning financial system, even during times of stress. But capital is not costless. Capital does not come into existence only at the point of failure—capital is an ongoing requirement, and an ongoing cost, for all banks. The cost of capital— both the required minimum amount of capital and buffers and the market price of capital—influences every aspect of the business of banking, including the business lines a bank pursues, the products and services it offers, and the cost and availability of those products and services. Banks are not obligated to offer the same financial products or services over time. Banks also are not obligated to maintain the same costs of products and services. Indeed, it would be irresponsible for a bank to ignore the cost of capital in managing its business, just as it would be irresponsible for a bank to ignore market preferences and forces when choosing its lines of business. Increases to the cost of capital do not simply evaporate on a bank's balance sheet, they are passed through to customers in various ways, including in the form of higher costs for financial services or in reduced availability of services available in the market. The cost of bank capital also influenceswhereactivities occur, either within the regulatory perimeter of the banking system or in non-bank entities and the broader shadow-banking system. When the cost of a bank engaging in an activity exceeds the cost of performing the same activity in a non-bank, that cost differential creates pressure that over time leads to a shift in these activities to non-bank providers. Where does that leave us? Achieving good policy requires acknowledging and balancing the benefits and costs of capital requirements, since it is one of the most important inputs policymakers can use to enhance the safety and efficiency of the banking system. Relying simply on the "more is better" approach downplays or ignores these critically important tradeoffs. When policymakers consider changes to the capital framework, particularly increases of the magnitude contemplated in the proposal, we must carefully weigh the benefit of increased safety from higher capital levels, with the direct costs to banks, and the downstream effects on consumers, businesses, and the broader economy. We must also consider the broader regulatory landscape and how changes to capital regulations may complement, overlap, or conflict with other regulatory requirements. And importantly, we must consider the broader implications for the structure of the U.S. financial system and for financial stability. While these considerations may caution us against capital increases of the magnitude contemplated in the proposal, I do see a potential path forward for capital reform. The Path ForwardAs I consider next steps, I am cautiously optimistic that policymakers can work toward a reasonable compromise, one that addresses two of the most critical shortcomings of the proposal: over-calibration and the lack of regulatory tailoring. Public feedback has also assisted in identifying the aspects of the proposal that result in the most severe unintended consequences. In my mind, it will be necessary for policymakers to modify the proposal to mitigate these issues and concerns as we move forward. CalibrationFirst, I would like to address calibration. The costs of this proposal, if implemented in its current form, would be substantial. As the proposal describes, Federal Reserve staff estimates these changes to result in an aggregate 20 percent increase in total risk-weighted assets across bank holding companies subject to the rule, although some commenters have projected much greater effects on some firms.3While the actual impact on binding capital requirements will vary by firm, it is apparent even with the incomplete information available today that this will represent a large increase in capital requirements. In October of 2023, the Federal Reserve launched a data collection to gather more information from the banks affected by the Basel III capital proposal.4The purpose of this quantitative impact study was to help better understand the estimated effects of the proposal. My understanding is that the Federal Reserve will release its analysis of those findings and some aggregated information for comment. And just as for the initial proposal, stakeholder feedback on this quantitative impact study and staff analysis will be very instructive as we seek to analyze and understand the expected impacts of the proposed capital reforms. Based on the information available, increasing capital requirements as initially proposed could result in significant harm to the U.S. economy through the impact on U.S. businesses, while failing to achieve the intended goals of improving safety and soundness and promoting financial stability. Much of the public feedback and concern focused on the calibration of the proposal and the corresponding impact across a number of industries. Farmers, ranchers, and agricultural producers that use derivatives to hedge price risks in agricultural supply chains have noted that the increased costs of providing these services from the proposal could lead banks to limit their availability in the marketplace.5Small-business owners (including builders, manufacturers, restaurant owners, and others) have indicated that the proposal could "make borrowing costs unaffordable and capital inaccessible."6These real-world examples only scratch the surface of the harmful effects of this proposal as described by a broad range of stakeholders noting the impact on a wide array of businesses. My initial observation is that, in the aggregate, the comments reflect a spectrum of concerns that are largely driven by calibration. These well-founded concerns and the risks they highlight are not surprising in light of the scale of the proposed capital increase. In addition, this direct independent feedback provides a new lens through which to view the proposal, enabling us to specifically identify and confront the predictable effects: higher costs of capital for banks and services for customers, less availability and narrower selection of services, and increased concentration in the providers of financial products and services. These consequences could disproportionately harm underserved markets, businesses, and communities, as bank customers will bear the cost of these increased capital requirements. In addition to the direct impacts of excessive calibration, policymakers must also consider international comparability and competitive disadvantages. A key element of the Basel capital rules is to promote greater international comparability, a goal that is frustrated when U.S. regulators over-calibrate requirements, at a level in excess of international peers and not supported by proportionate levels of risk. Significant banking activities occur in the international and cross-border context, and we know that financial stability risks can spread throughout global financial markets. One approach to mitigate the spread of financial stability risks is to promote minimum standards across jurisdictions that not only improve competitive equity in banking markets but that also make the financial system safer. The capital proposal reflects elements of the agreed upon Basel standards, but it far exceeds those agreed standards. Adjusting the calibration of the Basel capital reform proposal would have the important secondary benefit of enhancing this international consistency. To address this issue of calibration, policymakers must develop and work toward a target, a top-line aggregate capital level that would best promote safety and soundness and one that has a broad consensus among policymakers. Earlier efforts on the Basel proposal would have resulted in something closer to "capital neutrality"—with essentially minimal top-line change in aggregate capital requirements across the U.S. banking system.7I would note that the U.K. approach contemplates an average increase in the low single digits.8I look forward to learning more about stakeholder views on calibration from the comments we have received. TailoringNext, I will turn to the role of tailoring in bank capital reform efforts. The U.S. banking system is now much better capitalized than after the 2008 financial crisis, with substantially more liquidity. The current capital framework represents a risk-based, tailored approach, with the goal of aligning regulation with risk. The largest firms are divided into four categories based on size and complexity, with the largest and most complex firms subject to the most stringent requirements. Regional banks, with $10 billion to $100 billion in assets, are subject to a somewhat more streamlined capital framework. And finally, the simplest rules are reserved for community banks that rely on a less complex, relationship-based business model. Despite the past success in this approach, tailoring has recently come under attack in regulatory reform efforts and applications.9Some have argued that the bank stress last spring was the result of changes Congress made several years ago to promote risk-based and tailored supervision.10The theory is that following the implementation of tailoring rules, regulators adopted a less assertive supervisory approach, and that regulators should instead move toward a regime that imposes uniform standards to firms with significant variability in size, risk, complexity, and business model—shifting back to a one-size-fits-all regulatory approach. I have still not seen compelling evidence that removing tailoring is a productive regulatory approach. To the contrary, the existing capital framework demonstrates how the tailored approach can help support appropriate requirements based on firm characteristics. In my mind, the failure to apply tailoring is a fundamental flaw of the Basel capital reforms as proposed, and one that must be addressed. The application of today's capital requirements can be illustrated as an incline, with different or enhanced requirements kicking in at specific levels of size and complexity.11By contrast, if you were to superimpose the current Basel proposal on the tailoring framework, you would see something in the capital space that looks more like a single step, with a broad set of capital requirements kicking in at the $100 billion threshold. It is easy to see the difference between a slope and a cliff, and it is reasonable to expect that this cliff effect could become even more pronounced if we abandon tailoring in other areas, like liquidity regulation and long-term debt requirements. As I have noted in the past, incorporating graduated requirements not only helps to effectively allocate limited supervisory resources, but it also avoids creating regulatory incentives that could unintentionally alter the banking landscape. Capital requirements are a prime example of a regulatory requirement that could have a transformative effect on the structure of the banking system. Banks near the $100 billion asset size are already carefully considering the ongoing viability of remaining at an asset size near that threshold. Firms justabovethe threshold will face strong pressure to shrink or to merge with other firms to achieve economies of scale to comply with the breadth and complexity of the existing and proposed requirements. Firms justbelowthe threshold will need to be very intentional about approaching the $100 billion threshold, and it would be reasonable to expect that they may consider revising business strategies and activities to remain well below. While these distortive effects on the banking system may be unintended, they are a predictable consequence of pushing down requirements designed and calibrated for larger and more complex banks to those that are smaller and less complex. The critical role of tailoring must be incorporated as a foundational element of these regulatory reforms. In practice, I think this requires us to take a hard look in a more granular way at the banks that should be subject to different elements of the capital requirements—such as market-risk and credit valuation adjustment (CVA) requirements, credit and operational risk requirements, and the revised treatment of accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). Splitting out elements of the rule—thinking about the appropriate application of each—can result in more targeted revisions that improve the effectiveness of the capital framework, while minimizing unnecessary burden and costs. Technical Areas of ChangeI would also like to highlight a few important technical issues that should be addressed in ongoing reform efforts. To be sure, this is not an exhaustive list, but as policymakers consider the path that lies ahead, these are areas in the proposal where I see room for significant improvement. ClosingIn closing, I would like to thank the Center for Capital Markets at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce for the invitation to speak with you today about bank capital reform. Bank capital policy involves tradeoffs and policy decisions, and as you all know, policymakers have different views about how to strike the right balance. But as I view the landscape today, I do not view these differences as insurmountable obstacles to achieving a more effective and efficient set of Basel capital reforms. Unlike many other areas of reform, the impact of changes to bank capital can be analyzed and understood, which provides a much better ability to compare and reconcile the tradeoffs of specific reforms. In many ways, this is one of the empowering aspects of capital reform. In considering a reform, we have a greater capacity to understand and assess the true costs, including both the direct costs to banks and their customers, but also the potential harm to U.S. bank competitiveness in the global economy. The impact data collected from financial institutions subject to this rule describing effects directly linked to the proposed capital reforms will allow us to consider the combined and aggregate impact, to help us avoid a capital "end state" that is overlapping, inefficient, contradictory, and potentially harmful to banks, their customers, and the broader economy. As I have noted, my understanding is that the Federal Reserve will release its analysis of its findings and some aggregated information for comment. The data collected and released should help public commenters and policymakers assess the impact of the proposal. It should also serve as a guide to assist in shaping the next iteration of this proposal, whether that be in the form of a re-proposal or significantly revised final rule. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors.Return to text 2. See dissenting statement, "Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman" on the proposed rule to implement the Basel III endgame agreement for large banks, news release, July 27, 2023.Return to text 3. See, e.g., Financial Services Forum, American Bankers Association, Bank Policy Institute, and Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, "Comments on Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity (PDF)" (December 22, 2023), (noting that for the largest U.S. firms, the proposal would result in a greater than 30 percent increase in capital requirements, and a greater than 33 percent increase in risk-weighted assets).Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Launches Data Collection to Gather More Information from the Banks Affected by the Large Bank Capital Proposal It Announced Earlier This Year," press release, October 20, 2023.Return to text 5. See National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, Commodity Markets Council, National Cattlemen's Beef Association, National Grain and Feed Association, American Farm Bureau Federation, National Milk Producers Federation, National Pork Producers Council, American Cotton Shippers Association, Farm Credit Council, "Comments on Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity and Regulatory Capital Rule: Risk-Based Capital Surcharges for Global Systemically Important Bank Holding Companies (PDF)" (December 11, 2023).Return to text 6. 10,000 Small Businesses Voices, "Comments on Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity (PDF)" (November 21, 2023).Return to text 7. See Randal K. Quarles, "Between the Hither and the Farther Shore: Thoughts on Unfinished Business" (speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C., December 2, 2021), ("A major issue that we are grappling with is how to implement these [Basel III endgame capital] reforms, which reduce the role of bank internal models on bank capital requirements,while maintaining the overall level of aggregate capital requirements.") (emphasis added).Return to text 8. See Bank of England, "The PRA Publishes the First of Two Policy Statements for the Implementation of the Basel 3.1 Standards," press release, December 12, 2023, ("Based on its latest data, the PRA estimates that the impact of Basel 3.1 requirements will be low and result in an average increase in Tier 1 capital requirements for UK firms of around 3 percent once fully phased in….").Return to text 9. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Statement by Governor Bowman on Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Resolution Requirements for Large Banks and Application by U.S. Bancorp," press release, October 14, 2022.Return to text 10. Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018).Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Finalizes Rules That Tailor Its Regulations for Domestic and Foreign Banks to More Closely Match Their Risk Profiles," press release, October 10, 2019;Tailoring Rule Visual (PDF)(October 10, 2019).Return to text