Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At Davidson College, Davidson, North Carolina Thank you, President Hicks and Tara Boehmler, for the kind introduction.1 Let me start by saying that I am saddened by the tragic loss of life, destruction, and damage resulting from Hurricane Helene in North Carolina, and throughout this region. My thoughts are with the people and communities affected, including those in the Davidson College family. For our part, the Federal Reserve and other federal and state financial regulatory agencies are working with banks and credit unions in the affected area to help make sure they can continue to meet the financial services needs of their communities. I am happy to be back at Davidson College. This is a special community. I am bound to it by a shared experience defined not by its length, but by its intensity. As I visited with you today, and as I look around this hall, I see the faces of colleagues who became dear friends during the COVID-19 pandemic. Back then, we spoke often about the unprecedented uncertainty we faced. Amidst that uncertainty, however, we supported each other on this campus. Now, looking back, we can attest that this mutual support was vital. I am grateful to have been amongst you during that unprecedented time. Today, I am proud to see that Davidson is stronger than ever. I am excited to be here with you this evening and to talk to you about the history of the Federal Reserve's discount window.2The discount window is one of the tools the Fed uses to support the liquidity and stability of the banking system, and to implement monetary policy effectively. It was created in 1913 when the Fed was established. Today, more than 110 years later, this tool continues to play an important role. At the Fed, we always look for ways to improve our tools, including our discount window operations. Recently, the Fed published a request for information document to receive feedback from the public regarding operational aspects of the discount window and intraday credit.3 Today, I will do three things. First, I will discuss briefly my outlook for the U.S. economy. Second, I will offer my historical perspective on the discount window, starting in 1913 and ending in 2000. Finally, I will provide a few details about the request for information the Fed recently published. Tomorrow, I will say more about the discount window when I speak at the Charlotte Economics Club. Economic Outlook and Considerations for Monetary PolicyEconomic activity continues to grow at a solid pace. Inflation has eased substantially. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state. Slide 1 Slide 2 As you can see inslide 3, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, well down from 6.5 percent two years earlier. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent, compared with 5.2 percent two years earlier. Our restrictive monetary policy stance played a role in restraining demand and in keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of inflation surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. Inflation is now much closer to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent objective. I expect that we will continue to make progress toward that goal. While, overall, the economy continues to grow at a solid pace, the labor market has modestly cooled. Employers added an average of 186,000 jobs per month during July through September, a slower pace than seen early this year. A shown inslide 4, the unemployment rate now stands at 4.1 percent, up from 3.8 percent in September 2023. Meanwhile, job openings declined by about 4 million since their peak in March 2022. The good news is that the rise in unemployment has been limited and gradual, and the level of unemployment remains historically low. Even so, the cooling in the labor market is noticeable. Congress mandated the Fed to pursue maximum employment and price stability. The balance of risks to our two mandates has changed—as risks to inflation have diminished and risks to employment have risen, these risks have been brought roughly into balance. The FOMC has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal. To maintain the strength of the labor market, my FOMC colleagues and I recalibrated our policy stance last month, lowering our policy interest rate by 1/2 percentage point, as shown inslide 5. Looking ahead, I will carefully watch incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks when considering additional adjustments to the federal funds target range, our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy. My approach to monetary policymaking is to make decisions meeting by meeting. As the economy evolves, I will continue to update my thinking about policy to best promote maximum employment and price stability. Discount Window History1913: The Fed was establishedNow, I will turn to my perspective on the history of the discount window. Understanding this history is important as we consider ways to ensure the discount window continues to serve effectively in its critical role of providing liquidity to the banking system as the economy and financial system evolve. Before the Federal Reserve was founded, the U.S. experienced frequent financial panics. One example is illustrated inslide 6with a newspaper clipping from the Rocky Mountain Times printed on July 19, 1893. It depicts panic swirling against banks at a time when bank runs swept through midwestern and western cities such as Chicago, Denver, and Los Angeles. The illustration shows how waves of panic hit public confidence, the rocks in the picture, and how banks have a fortress mentality. They stand strong against the panic, but they are not lending, and they are isolated. Back then, the supply of money to the economy was inelastic in the short term, in part because the monetary system in the U.S. was based on the gold standard. Demand for cash, however, varied over the course of the year and was particularly strong during harvest season, when crops were brought to the market. The surge in demand for cash, combined with the inelastic supply of money in the short term, caused financial conditions to tighten seasonally. The banking system was fairly good at moving money to where it needed to go, but it had little scope to expand the total amount of money available in response to the U.S. economy's needs. So if a shock hit the economy when financial conditions were already tight, then the banking system struggled to provide the extra liquidity needed. Banks would seek to preserve liquidity by reducing their investments and denying loan requests, for example. Depositors, fearful that they might not be able to access their funds when they needed them, would rush to withdraw their money. Of course, that caused the banks to conserve further on liquidity. In some cases, they simply closed their doors until the storm passed. When banks closed their doors, economic activity would contract.4Activity would recover when the banks reopened, but the economic suffering in the meantime was meaningful. In addition to the supply of money in the economy being inelastic in the short term, two prominent frictions, asymmetric information and externalities, made banks and private markets vulnerable to systemic crises. Here, asymmetric information refers to the fact that customers do not have access to all the information they need to evaluate whether a bank is insolvent, illiquid, or both.5Therefore, customers rely on imperfect signals, such as news reports about another bank failing, to decide whether to withdraw their money from their own bank. Then there are externalities, in the sense that an individual bank may not consider how an innocent bystander may be negatively impacted by its actions. When a financial institution fails, that may lead depositors to withdraw money from other unrelated banks, which may in turn cause those banks to fail. Contagion can transform a single bank failure into a systemic crisis, where many banks fail, credit evaporates, the stock market collapses, the economy enters a recession, and the unemployment rate increases dramatically. The severe financial panic of 1907 stands out as an example of market failure due to these two prominent frictions. The panic was triggered by a series of bad banking decisions that led to a frenzy of withdrawals caused by asymmetric information and public distrust in the liquidity of the banking system.6Banks in many large cities, including financial centers such as New York and Chicago, simply stopped sending payments outside of their communities. The resulting disruption in the payment system and to the flow of liquidity through the banking system led to a severe, though short-lived, economic contraction. This experience led Congress to pass the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.7This act created the Federal Reserve System, composed of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C., and 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country.8 In 1913, the main monetary policy tool at the Fed's disposal was the discount window. At that time, the Fed did not use open market operations—the buying and selling of government securities in the open market—to conduct monetary policy. Instead, the Fed adjusted the money supply by lending directly to banks that needed funds through the discount window. The Fed's ability to provide funds to banks as needed made the money supply of the U.S. more elastic and considerably reduced the seasonal volatility in interest rates.9This ability also enabled the Fed to provide stability in times of stress, helping banks that experienced rapid withdrawals to satisfy their customers' demand for liquidity and thereby potentially preventing banking panics. 1920s: The Fed began to discourage strongly use of the discount windowIn fact, many researchers have argued that the existence of the Fed's discount window prevented a financial crisis in the early 1920s, when the banking sector came under pressure as the U.S. economy transitioned to a peacetime economy following the end of World War I.10There had been an agricultural boom during the war and a significant accumulation of debt within that sector. Farmers came under pressure as the prices of agricultural goods dropped from wartime highs. The banks sought to support their customers, and the Fed sought to support the banks. There were serious concerns about the condition of several banks in parts of the country. The Fed's discount window lending provided critical support that saved many banks but also resulted in habitual use of the discount window by some banks during the 1920s.11 Slide 7shows that as of August 1925, 593 member banks, 6 percent of the total, had been borrowing for a year or more from Federal Reserve Banks. Moreover, there were real solvency problems, and several banks failed with discount window loans outstanding. These challenges resulted in the Fed strongly discouraging banks from continuous borrowing from the discount window and the adoption of a policy of encouraging a "reluctance to borrow."12 By 1926, the Fed was explicit that borrowing at the discount window was meant to be short term. As I emphasize inslide 8, the Federal Reserve's annual report for 1926 stated that while continuous borrowing by a member bank may be necessary, depending on local economic conditions, "the funds of the Federal reserve banks are primarily intended to be used in meeting the seasonal and temporary requirements of members, and continuous borrowing by a member bank as a general practice would not be consistent with the intent of the Federal reserve act."13 The late 1920s also highlighted Fed concerns about the purpose of the borrowing. The Fed sought to distinguish between "speculative security loans" and loans for "legitimate business."14A staff reappraisal of the discount mechanism stated that "[t]he controversy over direct pressure intensified in the latter part of the 1920s as an increasing flow of bank credit went into the stock market."15In short, the Fed observed that some banks were becoming habitual borrowers from the discount window. It was concerned that an overreliance on discount window borrowings would weaken banks and make them more prone to failure. In the late 1920s, the Fed switched to open market operations as its primary tool for conducting monetary policy.16That allowed the Fed to determine the aggregate amount of liquidity in the system and to rely on private financial markets to distribute it efficiently. The discount window would thus serve as a safety valve if there was a shock that caused conditions to tighten unexpectedly or if individual banks experienced idiosyncratic shocks or somehow lost access to interbank markets. The intention of this set-up was for banks to use the discount window to borrow from the Fed only occasionally. Ordinarily and predominantly, financial institutions were supposed to rely on private markets for their funding. This set-up was designed to limit moral hazard—the possibility that institutions take unnecessary risks when there is no market discipline. This is the key balancing act. The Fed needs to be a reliable backstop to prevent financial crises, but it also needs to minimize moral hazard that comes from always standing ready to provide support. 1930s–1940s: The Great Depression and WWIIDuring the Great Depression in the 1930s, the banking system experienced severe stress, including many bank runs. There are many reasons why the discount window was insufficient to address the problems in the banking system in the 1930s. I will highlight only two. First, many banks were insolvent rather than illiquid. Central bank lending is not a fundamental solution in those circumstances. When banks are insolvent, it is important to manage the closure in as orderly a manner as possible. The establishment of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in 1933 gave bank regulators increased ability to do that. Relatedly, the challenging experiences of lending to troubled banks in the 1920s likely made the Fed more reluctant to lend in circumstances in which solvency concerns were material. Second, the types of collateral that the Fed was initially able to accept when lending to banks were quite limited. In response, in the early 1930s Congress expanded the range of banking assets that could serve as collateral for discount window loans and added a variety of new Fed emergency lending authorities.17These new lending authorities were used in the 1930s to help alleviate distress. Some were also used in the early 1940s as the Fed helped support the World War II mobilization effort. The period following the war was relatively calm. The role of the discount window shifted from addressing distress in the banking system to acting as a safety valve to manage tightness in money markets and support monetary policy operations. 1950–2000: Measures to discourage discount window borrowingIn March 1951, the U.S. Treasury and the Fed reached an agreement to separate government debt management from the conduct of monetary policy, thereby laying the foundation for the modern Fed.18 In the 1950s, the Fed set the interest rate on discount window loans above market rates. Thus, it served as an effective ceiling on the federal funds rate. The Fed continued to discourage extensive use of the discount window, but the relatively high interest rate also made its sustained use less attractive. In the 1960s, the Fed placed greater emphasis on open market operations to set its monetary policy stance. Concurrently, the Fed shifted to a policy of setting the interest rate on discount window loans below the market rates. Because the interest rate no longer deterred use of the window, the Fed turned increasingly to other measures, such as administrative pressures and moral suasion, to limit the frequency with which banks requested loans from the discount window. Indeed, between the late 1920s and the 1980s, the Fed adopted and amended numerous restrictions on discount window borrowing. Whenever discount window usage increased too much, the Fed tightened the restrictions to suppress borrowing. For example, in the 1950s, the Fed defined appropriate and inappropriate discount window borrowing. In particular, the Board's regulations in 1955 stated that "[u]nder ordinary conditions, the continuous use of Federal Reserve credit by a member bank over a considerable period of time is not regarded as appropriate" and provided more details on how Reserve Banks should evaluate the "purpose" of a credit request.19By 1973, the Board had made additional changes to its regulations on discount window use and defined three distinct discount window programs: adjustment credit, intended to help depository institutions meet short-term liquidity needs; seasonal credit, intended to help small depository institutions manage liquidity needs that arise from seasonal swings in loans and deposits; and extended credit, intended to help depository institutions that have somewhat longer-term liquidity needs resulting from exceptional circumstances.20 Over time, the Board added provisions in its regulations requiring banks to exhaust other sources of funding before using discount window credit.21In addition, in the early 1980s, the Fed levied a surcharge on frequent borrowings by large banks to augment the administrative restrictions.22Despite these policies to discourage use of the discount window,slide 9shows that discount window borrowing, adjusted for the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, was notable in the 1970s and 1980s, suggesting that the discount window was an important marginal source of funding for banks during that period. That changed in the 1980s and early 1990s, when there were notable solvency problems in the banking industry. During this period, the discount window provided support to troubled institutions, while the FDIC sought to find merger partners or otherwise manage the failure of these institutions in an orderly manner. The discount window activity that took place while FDIC resolutions proceeded increased the association between use of the discount window and being a troubled institution.23As a result, banks became more reluctant to borrow from the discount window. The greater reluctance to borrow from the discount window made it less effective, both as a monetary policy tool and as a crisis-fighting tool. That resulted in a series of efforts by the Fed in the early 2000s to change how the discount window operates. Tomorrow, I will discuss those efforts when I speak at the Charlotte Economics Club. A request for informationBefore closing, I'd like to return to where I began. Understanding the history of the discount window is important as we consider ways to ensure it continues to serve effectively in its critical role in providing liquidity to the banking system as the economy and financial system evolve. One way to ensure it continues to serve effectively is to collect feedback from the public.Slide 10provides some touch points on the Board's request for information document. The request for information seeks feedback from the public on a range of operational practices for the discount window and intraday credit, including the collection of legal documents; the process for pledging and withdrawing collateral; the process for requesting, receiving and repaying discount window advances; the extension of intraday credit; and Reserve Bank communications practices. My colleagues and I are looking forward to this feedback to inform potential future enhancements to discount window operations. The period for responding to our request for information ends on December 9, 2024. Thank you to the event organizers and to the Davidson College community for the opportunity to discuss this important topic with you. It has been such a pleasure to be back on campus. ReferencesAnderson, Clay (1971). "Evolution of the Role and the Functioning of the Discount Mechanism," inReappraisal of the Federal Reserve Discount Mechanism,vol. 1. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 133–65. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1922).8th Annual Report, 1921.Washington: Government Printing Office. ——— (1926).Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 12 (July). ——— (1927).13th Annual Report, 1926.Washington: Government Printing Office. Carlson, Mark (forthcoming).The Young Fed: The Banking Crises of the 1920s and the Making of a Lender of Last Resort.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Clouse, James (1994). "Recent Developments in Discount Window Policy (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 80 (November), pp. 965–77. Goodhart, Charles A.E. (1988).The Evolution of Central Banks. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Gorton, Gary (1988). "Banking Panics and Business Cycles,"Oxford Economic Papers,vol. 40 (December), pp. 751–81. Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick (2013). "The Federal Reserve and Financial Regulation: The First Hundred Years," NBER Working Paper Series 19292. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Meltzer, Allan (2003).A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913–1951.Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Miron, Jeffrey A. (1986). "Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the Founding of the Fed,"American Economic Review,vol. 76 (March), pp. 125–40. Meulendyke, Ann-Marie (1992). "Reserve Requirements and the Discount Window in Recent Decades (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Quarterly Review,vol. 17 (Autumn), pp. 25–43. Shull, Bernard (1971). "Report on Research Undertaken in Connection with a System Study," inReappraisal of the Federal Reserve Discount Mechanism,vol. 1. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 27–77. Terrell, Ellen (2021). "United Copper, Wall Street, and the Panic of 1907," Library of Congress,Inside Adams: Science, Technology & Business(blog), March 9. Willis, Henry Parker (1923).The Federal Reserve System: Legislation, Organization and Operation.New York: The Ronald Press Company. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. The discount window is a monetary policy facility where depository institutions can request to borrow money against collateral from the Fed. The term "window" originates with the now obsolete practice of sending a bank representative to a Reserve Bank physical teller window when a bank needed to borrow money. The term "discount" refers to how depository institutions borrow money on a discount basis—interest amount for the entire loan period (plus other charges, if any) is deducted from the principal at the time a loan is disbursed.Return to text 3. The Federal Reserve provides intraday credit to depository institutions to foster a safe and efficient payment system. For more information on intraday credit and the Board's Payment System Risk policy, see "Payment System Risk" on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/psr_about.htm.Return to text 4. See, for example, Goodhart (1988).Return to text 5. Illiquidity is a short-term cash flow problem. An illiquid bank cannot pay its current obligations, such as deposit withdrawals, even though the value of the bank's assets exceeds the value of its liabilities. In other words, illiquidity means the bank does not currently have the resources to meet its current obligations. With a short-term loan, an illiquid bank would be able to pay its obligations. Insolvency is a long-term balance sheet problem. Total obligations of an insolvent bank are larger than its total assets. A short-term loan would not help an insolvent bank. Of course, evaluating the quality of a bank's loan book in real time to determine whether a bank is solvent can be extremely challenging during a crisis. In addition, in some cases, illiquidity caused by large deposit withdrawals can lead banks to sell assets at fire-sale prices that then impairs their solvency. Conversely, concerns about insolvency, even if unfounded, can lead to liquidity problems. In the bank run literature, the connections between liquidity and solvency are a key factor that gives rise to runs.Return to text 6. The panic of 1907 started in October 1907 when three brothers—F. Augustus Heinze, Otto Heinze, and Arthur P. Heinze—as well as Charles W. Morse attempted to manipulate the price of United Copper stock by purchasing a large number of shares of the company. Their plan failed, and the stock price of United Copper collapsed. The collapse led to depositor runs on banks and trust companies associated with the Heinzes and Morse. This included a run on the Knickerbocker Trust Company, whose president was connected to Morse. The Knickerbocker Trust Company failed, and the New York Stock Exchange fell nearly 50 percent from its peak of the previous year in the wake of the failure. See Terrell (2021).Return to text 7. To aid its thinking on reforming the monetary system, Congress established the National Monetary Commission. The landmark 24 volume report from the commission provides a rich review of the operations of central banks in other countries, a history of financial crises in the U.S., and an appraisal of the state of the contemporary banking system in the U.S. at the time.Return to text 8. See "History and Purpose of the Federal Reserve" on the St. Louis Fed's website athttps://www.stlouisfed.org/in-plain-english/history-and-purpose-of-the-fed.Return to text 9. See Miron (1986).Return to text 10. See, for example, Gorton (1988). Willis (1923) and Board of Governors (1922) also suggest that the Fed prevented a crisis from happening in 1920.Return to text 11. See Carlson (forthcoming).Return to text 12. See Shull (1971, pp. 33–34).Return to text 13. See Board of Governors (1927, p. 4). In 1926, approximately one-third of all banks in the U.S. were member banks, holding about 60 percent of the total loans and investments for all banks; see Board of Governors (1926). Banks receiving charters from the federal government were required to become members of the Federal Reserve System while banks receiving charters from state governments had the option to become members. Discount window borrowing was originally limited to Federal Reserve System member banks. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 opened the window to all depository institutions.Return to text 14. See Gorton and Metrick (2013).Return to text 15. See Anderson (1971, p. 137). In the statement, "direct pressure" refers to the Fed policy of pressuring banks not to borrow from the window. Congress may have shared some of those concerns, as the Federal Reserve Act was amended in 1933 to include a passage in section 4 requiring Reserve Banks to be careful about speculative uses of the Federal Reserve credit.Return to text 16. Open market operations are the purchase or sale of securities (for example, U.S. Treasury bonds) in the open market by the Fed. In modern times, the short-term objective for open market operations is specified by the FOMC. For more information, please refer to "Open Market Operations" on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/openmarket.htm.Return to text 17. There are several banking acts that do this, but especially the Banking Act of 1932, the Emergency Relief and Construction Act of 1932, and the Banking Act of 1935. Yet one more reason why the discount window was insufficient to address the problems of the banking system in the 1930s is that, during this period, nonmember banks did not have access to the discount window. These banks suffered the most during the Great Depression. The ability of nonmember banks to access the window only changed in 1980 with the Monetary Control Act.Return to text 18. After the U.S. entered World War II, the Federal Reserve supported efforts by the Treasury to hold down the cost of financing the war by establishing caps on interest rates on Treasury securities (see, for instance, Meltzer, 2003, Chapter 7). The cap pertaining to longer-term interest rates continued to be in place until the 1951 agreement.Return to text 19. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Advances and Discounts by Federal Reserve Banks, 20 Fed. Reg. 261, 263 (PDF)(Jan. 12, 1955).Return to text 20. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks, 38 Fed. Reg. 9065, 9076-9077 (PDF)(April 10, 1973).Return to text 21. By 1980, the Board's regulations stated that adjustment credit "generally is available only after reasonable alternative sources of funds, including credit from special industry lenders, such as Federal Home Loan Banks, the National Credit Union Administration's Central Liquidity Facility, and corporate central credit unions have been fully used"; seasonal credit was "available only if similar assistance is not available from other special industry lenders"; and other extended credit was available only "where similar assistance is not reasonably available from other sources, including special industry lenders"; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks, 45 Fed. Reg. 54009, 54009-54011 (PDF)(Aug. 14, 1980). See also Clouse (1994).Return to text 22. See Meulendyke (1992).Return to text 23. A congressional inquiry found that this lending likely increased losses to the deposit insurance funds at the time and led to limitations on the ability of the Federal Reserve to provide loans to troubled depository institutions as part of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau today announced the dollar thresholds used to determine whether certain consumer credit and lease transactions in 2025 are subject to certain protections under Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) and Regulation M (Consumer Leasing). By law, the agencies are required to adjust the thresholds annually based on the annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, known as CPI-W. Transactions at or below the thresholds are subject to the protections of the regulations. Specifically, based on the 3.4 percent annual percentage increase in the CPI-W as of June 1, 2024, Regulation Z and Regulation M generally will apply to consumer credit transactions and consumer leases of $71,900 or less in 2025. However, private education loans and loans secured by real property, such as mortgages, are subject to Regulation Z regardless of the amount of the loan. Federal Registernotice: Consumer Leasing (Regulation M) (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Truth in Lending (Regulation Z) (PDF)
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Reserve Board, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency today announced that the 2025 threshold for higher-priced mortgage loans that are subject to special appraisal requirements will increase from $32,400 to $33,500. The threshold amount will be effective January 1, 2025, and is based on the 3.4 percent annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, known as CPI-W, as of June 1, 2024. The Dodd-Frank Act added special appraisal requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans to the Truth in Lending Act, including that creditors obtain a written appraisal based on a physical visit to the interior of the home before making a higher-priced mortgage loan. The rules implementing these requirements contain an exemption for loans of $25,000 or less, adjusted annually to reflect CPI-W increases. Federal Registernotice: Appraisals for Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans Exemption Threshold (PDF)
Governor Lisa D. Cook At “Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications of AI, Big Data, and Remote Work,” a conference organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Richmond, Atlanta, Georgia Thank you, President Bostic. Let me start by saying my thoughts are with all the people of Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee and the other communities who have felt the force of Helene's impact. I am saddened by the tragic loss of life and widespread disruption in these regions served by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Richmond. As Chair Powell said yesterday, we at the Fed are encouraging banks to work with customers in affected areas and we are working to support the Reserve Banks to ensure there are ample cash supplies, which can be especially important during times of power outages. I am always happy to be in Atlanta, in Georgia, and at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. I grew up in Georgia, and I am a proud graduate of Spelman College. Atlanta is an appropriate place to speak about today's topic, artificial intelligence (AI), as it is in the midst of large corporations and startups developing uses for AI and near so many impressive schools, including Georgia Tech, a top AI research university and where I took courses to prepare for a Ph.D. in economics. Our tech entrepreneurship and AI roundtable with Chair Powell, held at Spelman last year, is a testament to Atlanta being such a locus of activity. Today, I will speak to you about AI, big data, and the path ahead for productivity.1My comments today will build upon what I offered a year ago at the NBER AI meeting in Toronto, when I emphasized the importance of business decision-making in our progress along that path.2Technology alone will not determine the outcome. Futurists have dreamed of an autonomous, thinking machine throughout the modern era. Benjamin Franklin once lost a game of chess to such a machine, the "Mechanical Turk"; of course, there was a human chess master hidden inside. Nowadays, chess engines that beat the top players can run on your phone. So, what exactly makes these machines merit the label of "artificial intelligence"? Information systems with AI exploit complex patterns recognized in vast unstructured data sets to mimic human creativity, problem solving, and critical thinking. Some forms of AI—prediction of customer tastes with machine learning, for example—are already employed in the business sector. Others are still emerging, especially generative AI—programs that create new text and images in response to prompts. Applications in software creation, customer service, and marketing are already with us. But the full scope of generative AI's application will be revealed slowly as firms experiment and innovate. This subject bears careful research and understanding in my role as a monetary policymaker. The Federal Reserve's dual mandate is to promote maximum employment and stable prices. As I discussed in a recent speech at the Ohio State University, the spread of AI and other technologies could have an effect on both.3 Artificial Intelligence Adoption on the RiseLet me say from the outset that there is tremendous uncertainty about AI's implications. We still do not know what the magnitude or intensity of these effects will be, which workers and firms will be most affected, how big the increase in productivity might be, or even the period over which these effects will be realized. While much is still to be learned, I see growing evidence that AI is poised to have a substantial effect on U.S. and global labor markets. As firms deploy these technologies and workers discover ways to make use of them, such developments can create the conditions for greater productivity and thus higher wage growth consistent with stable prices. And adjustments in the labor market that follow as the economy adapts to technical change can affect maximum employment. My view is that AI, and generative AI in particular, is likely to become a general-purpose technology—one that spreads throughout the economy, sparks downstream innovation, and continues to improve over time. Since my speech last year, further evidence in favor of a cautiously optimistic view has accumulated. The list of tasks for which AI performance is at least equivalent to that of a skilled human continues to grow. Remarkably, one AI model reached silver-medal performance at the International Mathematical Olympiad this year.4Survey results from the Census Bureau show that AI adoption has risen, with AI in regular use across many sectors of the economy, but is still used in only a small share of firms.5Other surveys find wider adoption. For example, a study from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis found generative AI is being adopted at a faster rate than the internet and personal computers were at a comparable point after those technologies were widely introduced.6In a sign that the prospect of more widespread use of AI is on the horizon, U.S. data center construction spending and semiconductor imports have soared in the past two years. Examining ProductivitySince the high-tech boom ended in the early 2000s, smoothing through recession-driven swings, growth in output per hour worked has been relatively modest, roughly 1.5 percent per year, on average, though it has picked up some over the past two years. In fact, the latest estimate for productivity would not have looked out of place in the high-tech boom: it grew 2.7 percent over the year ending in the second quarter. The emergence of generative AI has raised hopes for a technology-fueled revival of strong growth in labor productivity, which could support rising real earnings for workers and purchasing power for households. Like many of the most significant innovations of the past few centuries—such as the steam engine, electricity, computers, and the internet—AI has the potential to affect labor productivity in a wide swath of economic activities across many industries and occupations. Although I share the view that AI could lift productivity out of this period of low growth, it bears emphasis that recent productivity gains have been modest despite rather impressive changes in information technology. For example, we live much of our lives on our smartphones, devices that almost no one used 20 years ago. Moreover, the generative AI models that have captured our attention since 2022 were preceded by other forms of AI that have already been integrated into e-commerce and other business operations. In other words, the modest productivity growth seen of late already incorporates gains from some types of AI. Whether generative AI delivers a similar, incremental contribution to productivity growth or something larger remains to be seen. The degree to which AI leads to productivity improvement bears careful watching, because, if it does meaningfully lift productivity, it could help constrain unit labor costs and inflation in the long run. And, of course, measuring productivity in real time is challenging. Famously, Chairman Alan Greenspan spied productivity gains from information technology in the 1990s long before they appeared in the data. The challenge for macroeconomic forecasters is that productivity does not follow immediately from invention and innovation. The translation of technology into productivity depends on the choices made by firms, workers, and policymakers. Time-consuming work at the adopting firm is often needed to tailor the technology to its specific needs.7For example, a case study by researchers at Harvard Business School revealed that when GitHub built Copilot, a code-completion tool, on top of generative AI technology adopted from OpenAI, it went through a process of experimentation, false starts, management challenges, and substantial expense.8 Moreover, while productivity growth follows from translation of clever new ideas into concrete business practices, this full effect is realized only when capital and labor are reallocated to the firms that are most adept at doing so. This "business dynamism" contribution to productivity dwindled in the years before the pandemic.9The recent surge in new business creation provides some hope that dynamism may be rebounding. Variation between FirmsThe push to use AI algorithms to make more decisions will entail some degree of adjustment at AI-using firms to the jobs of their employees, as well. Understandably, the prospect of those adjustments has many knowledge workers concerned about job security.10Importantly, when one considers the wide array of tasks involved in performing most jobs—some of the ones we take for granted are quite difficult to automate—it becomes harder to imagine entire positions becoming redundant.11For example, an advertising firm might allow AI to produce suggested copy and images reflecting the identity of a client, but only after providing the AI system with notes based on meetings, observation, and experience. And the proposed advertisement could be further reviewed and revised, presented to the client, and evaluated for success by human beings. This makes it likely that the bundle of tasks involved in many jobs will change, as will the share of the worker's time spent on each task. AI may field routine customer service requests and leave unusual or especially important requests to human representatives. Indeed, work by Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey Raymond shows that AI may accelerate the acquisition of skills for new workers by offering suggested responses based on the history of previous interactions on a given subject.12This adjustment process entails both modifying the mix of tasks handled by retained workers and hiring new talent from outside the firm. A recent survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York found that very few AI-adopting firms had laid off workers as part of that process in the previous six months, and many firms have plans to retrain their workers to use AI.13 Adapting an incumbent business to fully exploit AI can be a daunting task: the business may need to substantially reorganize its operations to reap the full benefit of AI.14Given access to information from throughout the firm, AI may offer insights into business process efficiency, but the data landscape may be Balkanized, with differing standards and restrictive permissions. Reports are that one prominent technology firm addressed this problem by requiring that employees provide widespread access to all data sets within the company and service interfaces to make the access seamless.15Not all firms will find it feasible or desirable to take such sweeping measures. New entrants may have an advantage in this landscape in that they have fewer entrenched practices. In a development that one may speculate is connected to AI, Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger found that a large share of the surge in new business entry seen in the past three years has been in high tech industries.16Importantly, even in this moment of abundant startups, we may be missing the potential contributions of some groups. In my own work before joining the Federal Reserve Board, I found that investors underrate the prospects of Black-founded, or simply outsider-founded, startups in early funding stages.17Addressing better assessment in the early stages of invention and innovation could broaden the range of new entrants and the ideas they contribute. Nonetheless, incumbent firms may be better positioned to fund the gargantuan sums required to train AI models. Leading-edge models, adaptable for a wide range of tasks, cost tens of millions of dollars to train.18Big data processing techniques—distributed computing, scalability, in-memory processing—play an important role in that training, which uses terabytes of unstructured data. And those firms have the accumulated data from their business operations with which to train AI. Some observers have noted that the finite supply of high-quality data is beginning to constrain model improvement.19Apparently, central bankers are not the only ones always looking for "more good data"! Future gains are expected to be driven by the adaptation of AI to specific contexts using proprietary data available only within the confines of individual firms. ConclusionIn closing, looking ahead, I anticipate an acceleration in productivity grounded in the impressive advances in AI, but substantial uncertainty attends that forecast. Such uncertainty arises from the nature of invention, innovation, diffusion, and adaptation of new technologies, as well as from policy decisions that will govern this process. Fostering the global innovation ecosystem remains desirable through research and development, advanced education, worker training and retraining, and legal protections for intellectual property. Moreover, a consensus needs to be forged on the benefits and costs of regulation of the use of AI in the areas of privacy, compensation for training data, perpetuation and amplification of bias, and fraud. Additionally, the ultimate outcomes could benefit from broader inclusion across demographic groups in the startup and research communities and attention to the potential effects on competition of the advantages of incumbent firms. In short, AI will be translated into productivity improvements with "long and variable lags," as we monetary policymakers like to say. The changes we see in the macroeconomy—aggregate output, employment, and income—are the collective effect of millions of firms, households, and government policymakers thinking through what AI means for them. You might say that, like the Mechanical Turk, ultimately the human inside the machine is still in charge. My hope is that rising productivity gains will serve as a counterweight to inflation going forward. We will monitor these developments closely. Thank you for having me here today. I look forward to your questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Lisa D. Cook (2023), "Generative AI, Productivity, the Labor Market, and Choice Behavior," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research Economics of Artificial Intelligence Conference, Fall 2023, Toronto, September 22.Return to text 3. See Lisa D. Cook (2024), "What Will Artificial Intelligence Mean for America's Workers?" speech delivered at the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, September 26.Return to text 4. See Nestor Maslej, Loredana Fattorini, Raymond Perrault, Vanessa Parli, Anka Reuel, Erik Brynjolfsson, John Etchemendy, Katrina Ligett, Terah Lyons, James Manyika, Juan Carlos Niebles, Yoav Shoham, Russell Wald, and Jack Clark (2024),Artificial Intelligence Index Report2024(PDF)(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University, Institute for Human-Centered AI, AI Index Steering Committee, April); and Manon Bischoff (2024), "AI Reaches Silver-Medal Level at This Year's Math Olympiad,"Scientific American,August 6.Return to text 5. Of the firms sampled in the U.S. Census Bureau's semiweekly Business Trends and Outlook Survey, 5.5 percent indicated they had used AI in the two weeks preceding the August 25, 2024, survey—1.5 percentage points higher than a year earlier. Other estimates based on convenience samples report higher shares. For example, McKinsey & Company estimates that 72 percent of firms used AI in at least one business function in August 2024, up from 55 percent the year before. For a comparison of the Census and McKinsey measures, see Kathryn Bonney, Cory Breaux, Cathy Buffington, Emin Dinlersoz, Lucia S. Foster, Nathan Goldschlag, John C. Haltiwanger, Zachary Kroff, and Keith Savage (2024), "Tracking Firm Use of AI in Real Time: A Snapshot from the Business Trends and Outlook Survey," NBER Working Paper Series 32319 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April).Return to text 6. See Alexander Bick, Adam Blandin, and David Deming (2024), "The Rapid Adoption of Generative AI," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,On the Economy(blog), September 23.Return to text 7. See Timothy Bresnahan, Shane Greenstein, David Brownstone, and Kenneth Flamm (1996), "Technical Progress and Co-invention in Computing and in the Uses of Computers,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics1996, pp. 1–83.Return to text 8. See Frank Nagle, Shane Greenstein, Maria P. Roche, Nataliya Langburd Wright, and Sarah Mehta (2023), "Copilot(s): Generative AI at Microsoft and GitHub," Harvard Business School case study,Harvard Business Review,November 16.Return to text 9. See Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2020), "Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks versus Responsiveness,"American Economic Review,vol. 110 (December), pp. 3952–90.Return to text 10. The2024 Work Trend Index Annual Report,published by Microsoft and LinkedIn, reports that 45 percent of knowledge workers are afraid AI will replace them. See Microsoft Corp. and LinkedIn (2024),2024 Work Trend Index Annual Report: AI at Work Is Here. Now Comes the Hard Part(Redmond, Wash.: Microsoft Corp. and LinkedIn, May), https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/worklab/work-trend-index/ai-at-work-is-here-now-comes-the-hard-part.Return to text 11. See David H. Autor, Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2002), "Upstairs, Downstairs: Computers and Skills on Two Floors of a Large Bank,"Industrial and Labor Relations Review,vol. 55 (April), pp. 432–47.Return to text 12. See Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey R. Raymond (2023), "Generative AI at Work," NBER Working Paper Series 31161 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November).Return to text 13. See Jaison R. Abel, Richard Deitz, Natalia Emanuel, and Benjamin Hyman (2024), "AI and the Labor Market: Will Firms Hire, Fire, or Retrain?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Liberty Street Economics(blog), September 4. The survey covered firms in the New York–Northern New Jersey region. A June survey of Texas firms yielded similar results.Return to text 14. See Marco Iansiti and Karim R. Lakhani (2020),Competing in the Age of AI: Strategy and Leadership When Algorithms and Networks Run the World(Boston: Harvard Business Review Press).Return to text 15. See Iansiti and Lakhani,Competing in the Age of AI,in note 14.Return to text 16. See Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), "High Tech Business Entry in the Pandemic Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 19).Return to text 17. See Lisa D. Cook, Matt Marx, and Emmanuel Yimfor (2022), "Funding Black High-Growth Startups," NBER Working Paper Series 30682 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November).Return to text 18. See Ben Cottier, Robi Rahman, Loredana Fattorini, Nestor Maslej, and David Owen (2024), "The Rising Costs of Training Frontier AI Models," arXiv preprint, arXiv:2405.21015 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University, May).Return to text 19. See Tammy Xu (2022), "We Could Run Out of Data to Train AI Language Programs,"MIT Technology Review,November 24.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 2024 Community Banking Research Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri It is an honor to return to St. Louis for the 12th year of the Community Banking Research Conference.1This conference is a model of effective partnership between the Federal Reserve and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and more recently, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). It is an opportunity for us all to dig deeper into the community banking model and the important role of community banks now and into the future. Together, regulators work to ensure that the approach to supervision and regulation is fit for purpose, and that each element of both supervision and regulation acts in a complementary manner. Policy disagreements are a healthy part of the process, but we must also strive to build consensus where we can. At a minimum, we must understand and respect our counterparts' and colleagues' viewpoints. Ultimately, we all share the same goal of promoting a safe and sound banking system. The strength of the U.S. banking system relies upon the diversity of its institutions, and facilitating an environment that allows each category of bank to thrive is essential to fostering a healthy financial system. For community banks, this includes building a framework that better supports the unique characteristics of these institutions. Today, my remarks will consider three foundational questions as we contemplate revising the community banking framework: (1) Given the continued evolution of the banking system, how should a community bank be defined? (2) Are we pursuing the most appropriate approach to supervision and regulation of community banks, and finally, (3) How can we build a policy framework that better supports and anticipates this evolution of the banking system now and into the future? How to Define a Community BankBy necessity, regulators divide banks into more manageable categories. The Federal Reserve has distinct portfolios that oversee "community," "regional," and four "categories" of larger banks.2The Federal Reserve and federal banking agencies further subdivide these portfolios based on additional factors. They may also depart from this framework altogether to group banks across portfolios or based on other common features. This approach to separating bank supervisory portfolios can enable us to more clearly articulate the tailoring applied to specific requirements of supervision and regulation.3This approach has its virtues, including allowing examiners to better organize supervisory activities and training in different portfolios to focus on issues that are most relevant for the institutions being examined. When appropriately executed, it can lead to better and more risk-focused supervision, which ultimately promotes a safer and more sound banking system. Of course, there are limits to this framework. And we should continue to ask if the metrics and thresholds established through regulation, and more often recently through supervisory policy decisions, are appropriate over time as conditions change. Locking regulatory standards into a fixed asset-size threshold has its costs. Over time, these fixed thresholds fail to take into account growth attributable to broader economic growth and inflation. They are also not reflective of any changes in a particular bank's activities or risk profile. As a result, many firms that are stable in their growth, business model, and risk profile end up unintentionally crossing regulatory thresholds. As they approach, and certainly once they cross over these asset-size lines, they must comply with additional regulatory and supervisory requirements that were specifically designed and implemented for larger and more complex firms. While the fixed-threshold approach benefits from simplicity, it is necessary to periodically revisit the policy effect of these bright-line thresholds. There are certainly cases in which a bank with assets less than $10 billion faces risks that are disproportionate to its asset size, warranting greater supervisory scrutiny. For these firms, asset size may vastly understate their risk profile. Often, they do not operate like traditional community banks, relying instead on nontraditional services and engaging in complex activities. Therefore, it may be appropriate for a community bank to be subject to additional oversight. This is particularly relevant when a bank has un-remediated, long-standing supervisory issues that require more supervisory monitoring and oversight. In such cases, a community bank supervisory approach is likely not sufficient or appropriate. At the same time, many banks with assets over $10 billiondooperate like community banks, with a relationship-based straightforward business model, yet they are not regulated or supervised as such. Over time, the mismatch in supervisory expectations around this and other asset thresholds becomes more pronounced as economic growth and inflation effectively lower them. This results in potentially overly complex supervisory constructs for banks with a limited traditional community bank risk profile. Is it appropriate to impose more restrictive requirements on firms when those heightened requirements are not a deliberate policy choice based on the level of risk? Is it appropriate to treat each bank below a regulatory threshold as a traditional community bank? Historically, regulators have been willing to push more complex requirements and expectations down to smaller banks—essentially bumping them into a higher risk tier—than moving larger firms into a lower risk tier when that treatment may be more appropriate. One important aspect of this definitional question involves the natural evolution of banking, specifically as it relates to innovation. The "push down" of regulatory and supervisory standards often applies when a bank pursues activities that fit under the broad umbrella of "innovation." Innovation can be defined expansively to include engaging in bank-fintech partnerships, using (or considering using) digital ledger technology, or even providing traditional banking services to entities that touch the crypto-asset ecosystem. Innovation can present a challenging problem for both regulators and banks. If the "cost" of adopting innovation results in a bank's inclusion in a higher compliance tier, it may be difficult to encourage greater investment in innovation for smaller banks. Establishing appropriate regulatory thresholds does not force regulators to eliminate or purge innovation from the banking system, especially among community banks.4 When considering building a framework to support community banks, the definition is key—which banks will be in scope? The answer lies in the bank's business model, activities, and risk profile. Where we have established fixed-dollar asset thresholds, we must commit to revisit and adjust them as needed. In my view, this is a principle that extends beyond the lines defining community banks to all regulatory and supervisory thresholds. While there is need for flexibility in both directions, it is apparent that over time economic growth and inflation will result in thresholds that are inappropriately low. The Supervision and Regulation of Community BanksEstablishing a definition for community banks leaves open the fundamental question of regulatory and supervisory approach. Before turning to that discussion, we need to take stock of supervision and regulation today. What areas of the framework require review and attention? The Tradeoffs of RegulationRegulation can be a powerful and effective tool to promote bank safety and soundness, and U.S. financial stability. The special privileges that are granted with a banking charter—including deposit insurance and access to the discount window—all come with the responsibility and obligation to comply with the bank regulatory framework. A robust presence of community banks, especially those that are remote and rural, enables access to credit, banking, and payment services in underserved markets and communities. These banks support local economies by serving consumers and small- and medium-sized businesses, building an economic foundation to drive business development and growth. But community banks, like any business, face the economic reality that accompanies running a successful business. Each must manage its costs—including personnel, funding, and regulatory compliance—in light of its revenues to achieve a reasonable return on equity. When a bank's costs increase, there is, by necessity, a need to make changes if the bank hopes to maintain profitability and ultimately its survival. This usually involves either cutting costs or raising prices on banking services. How do the realities of operating a business inform our current approach to regulation? The question becomes acutely relevant when regulators consider imposing new or revised regulations. Regulators should always ask (1) what problem does this new regulation solve, (2) what are costs of this approach, and (3) are there alternative approaches? Before discussing the path forward, I would like to note an example that highlights this concern. The final Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations issued in 2023 established new regulatory thresholds defining "small," "intermediate" and "large" banks, with the last category—large banks—including every bank with more than $2 billion in assets.5In my view, this rulemaking represented a missed opportunity to rationalize the requirements of the CRA among community banks, and ignored the fundamental differences among banks with different balance sheets and business models.6An approach that applies the same evaluation standards to a bank with $2 billion in assets as it does to a bank with $2 trillion in assets arguably represents a shortcoming in considering the fundamental differences among firms, and the disproportionate costs these standards may impose on the smallest banks. The Hidden Cost of Supervision and GuidanceWhile regulation carries with it the obligation to comply with public notice and comment procedures under the Administrative Procedure Act, regulators have far more discretion in the supervisory process, and in issuing "guidance" that is technically non-binding but often operates as a de facto requirement. The development and implementation of new supervisory approaches and of guidance largely escape rigorous scrutiny due to the lack of formal procedural requirements for its development. This is true even though the expectations created by guidance can be equally or more impactful to banks than rules. For example, the examination process often produces supervisory findings over-emphasizing non-core and non-financial risks, highlighting issues like IT and operational risk, management, risk management, and internal controls.7These issues have filtered down from examinations and findings at the largest banks to the smallest, raising the question of appropriateness of application for smaller firms. In the supervisory process, we should guard against being distracted by less relevant issues. The prevalence of supervisory findings related to nonfinancial metrics is in part driven by the time it may take to remediate certain issues. However, we should also scrutinize whether this trend is indicative of our supervisory focus—beyond financial risk and toward non-financial risks and internal processes—and whether that shift is appropriate. We should also be aware that due to the vast diversity in business models, size, and geographic footprint among banks, we should not expect every firm to follow the same standards and must be careful to prevent forcing uniformity through "grading on a curve." This risk can be exacerbated through any type of horizontal-like reviews. The supervisory findings made during the examination process inform bank ratings, which can have follow-on effects like limiting options for mergers and acquisitions (M&A) activity; raising the cost of liquidity; or diverting resources away from other, more important bank management priorities. Guidance can also impose costs on banks that are not always obvious or quantified. The purpose of guidance is to provide clarity to banks and reduce implementation uncertainty and risk. To serve this purpose, however, guidance must be clear, actionable, and account for the needs of the targeted firms, especially for community banks. In 2023, the federal banking agencies published supervisory guidance addressing third-party risk management, guidance expressly applicable to community banks. As I noted at the time this guidance was issued, it included shortcomings that were known and identified, but not addressed in advance.8While I am pleased that the community bank implementation guide was eventually published, this recent example demonstrates that we need to ensure new guidance provides clarity to regulated firms on its own, or that we provide additional resources at the same time we publish the guidance. Guidance can help clarify uncertainty about the application of legal requirements or suggest how regulators may view particular activities in the supervisory process. But when guidance is unclear or ambiguous about supervisory views and expectations, it can hinder community banks' ability to clearly understand and meet them. Community bankers feel a strong obligation to review the voluminous body of guidance published by regulators, knowing that even where it does not apply to them on its face, it may be pushed down to these banks as a best practice in the future.9 Bank Mergers, Acquisitions, and De Novo FormationsWhat does a healthy banking system look like? While we often espouse the virtues of a "diverse" banking system—one with many different sizes of institutions and the flexibility to shift in size over time—a healthy banking system includes opportunities for entry and exit— from de novo bank formation through merger and acquisition activity. De novo bank formation promotes competition and greater availability of banking services. As banks consolidate or wind down operations, new banks fill gaps in the banking system. But the significant decline in the number of de novo banks raises questions about whether this pipeline can continue to be effective, even while there is existing and unmet demand for new charters.10While factors other than the regulatory climate for applications may influence bank formation, the application process itself can be a significant roadblock, one that can limit the healthy formation of new community banks. For example, the M&A approval process can have a disproportionate impact on community banks because the "screens" used to evaluate the competitive effects of a proposed merger often result in a finding that a rural market M&A is "anticompetitive."11Even when these transactions are eventually approved, the mechanical approach to analyzing competitive effects, which isolates deposits as the proxy for the bundle of banking services, results in many delays for M&A transactions involving community banks or requiring additional review and analysis. Some recent policy changes at the FDIC have signaled a growing awareness of the need to better recognize a broader range of competition. But I am concerned that fully pivoting to a segment-by-segment analysis of competitive effects could, in practice, result in greater opportunities for regulatoryobjectionto transactions, rather than as a mechanism to better reflect the competitive pressures for community banks. Replacing the deposit-based threshold to analyze competition with a completely open-ended approach—without standards for what products will be reviewed, what standards to apply for different products, and how to approach a transaction where the competitive impacts vary by product type—seems likely to promote inconsistency in the analysis among firms, and even longer delays in processing times. This is especially concerning when accompanied by changes that may result in even greater barriers to M&A regulatory approval.12 Fostering an environment that enables bank formation and merger transactions is vital to ensuring a future for community banking. Without viable formation and merger options for all banks, but especially for community banks, we will create a "barbell" in the banking system. If this continues, it will eventually result in a handful of very large banks, and an ever-shrinking number of community banks, with nothing left in the middle. Over time, these trends will result in a reduction in available credit and services, an increase in the number of unbanked or underbanked communities, and economic harm. Building a Framework to Better Support Community BanksAfter acknowledging the importance of community banks and effectively defining these firms, the next step is identifying principles for how these firms should be regulated and supervised. The guiding principles are relatively straightforward: the approach must be tailored to risk, transparent, and consistent across similar institutions. Together, these elements can create an opportunity to construct an enduring community bank regulatory and supervisory framework for the future. This conference provides an ideal venue to facilitate conversations that can help spur the development of blue-sky ideas to preserve community banking well into the future. While it would be impossible to lay out a comprehensive blueprint for a community banking reform agenda in this speech, I see several opportunities that are promising and essential. The Value of ExperienceBuilding this framework for the future starts with personnel, the people making decisions over the long term. How do we approach our responsibilities? We should highlight examples that have been successful but also reflect on the significant work that remains to be done. Congress reserved one seat on the Federal Reserve Board for someone with demonstrated primary experience working in or supervising community banks.13While Congress did not enumerate any specific additional responsibilities for this particular seat on the Board, the creation of this role itself is an implicit acknowledgement of the value that this experience can bring across the Board's functions, especially regarding bank regulation and supervision. This experience, of having worked as a banker or as a state regulator, is uncommon within the Federal regulatory agencies. For example, of the current members of the Federal Reserve Board, I am the only member with experience as a banker or state regulator. In my view, we should ask how someone with this experience in the community banking system can best serve on the Board. This experience and perspective is critical. As a former community banker at a state-chartered bank and as the State Bank Commissioner of Kansas, I have seen and directly experienced the practical effect of supervision and regulation from "both sides" of the banker's desk. With this background, one understands and appreciates the importance of a respectful and healthy partnership between state and federal regulators and the need for setting high standards and applying strong oversight to banks of all sizes, including community banks. This background also provides perspective on how overregulation can impose disproportionate burden on a community bank, over time leading to the erosion of the viability of the community banking model. The requirement for community banking experience does not equate to advocacy on behalf of community banks. Instead, this role provides much-needed perspective on—and calls attention to—bank regulatory and supervisory matters that affect community banks. When I arrived at the Board, I was designated to serve as the chair of the Subcommittee on Smaller Regional and Community Banking. One of my first priorities was to make clear to examination staff the importance of their work in supervising community banks. After the 2008 financial crisis, although many community banks failed, much of the supervisory attention shifted to the very largest firms. The focus of this role provided the platform and opportunity to prioritize small regional and community banking issues, which led to a number of important successes, including: These accomplishments highlight how prioritizing community banking issues at the highest level can improve the outcomes and experiences for community banks. We need a balanced approach to regulation and supervision of community banks. This approach should prioritize the key risks facing the banking system, acknowledge the costs of regulation and supervision, and consider alternatives that may be more efficient than simply adding additional requirements and expectations for smaller institutions. While I am proud of these accomplishments and our work together, a more formal structure for this seat's responsibilities—one that includes dedicated responsibility over the supervision and regulation of community banks, and to play an active role in interagency coordinating bodies like the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)—would go a long way toward building and preserving an enduring framework that supports community banks in the future. State CoordinationOne priority that would enhance our current approach to supervision would be to more effectively engage and coordinate with state banking regulators. What does coordination look like in practice? As a baseline, it should include communication during the consideration of regulatory proposals. But let's begin with the examination process. One of the concerning trends in 2023 were reports—including reports from state banking regulators—that some federal supervisory actions were excessive considering the risks posed by some smaller institutions.14Historically, such disagreements have been uncommon because the examination process for state-chartered banks is joint between the state and federal counterparts at the Fed or the FDIC. We share responsibility for oversight of state banks, and jointly participate in examinations, so it is unsurprising that we often reach similar conclusions. When there are disagreements, supervisory divergence can also signal material changes in approach or standards, a shift that fails to accomplish the goal of effective supervisory judgment and consistency in the supervision of banks of all types. There are other opportunities to expand coordination with states, both through formal coordination bodies and when engaged in rule making efforts that are intended to impact state-chartered institutions. These coordination bodies include (1) the FFIEC—which is tasked with prescribing uniform principles, standards, and reporting forms for the federal examination of financial institutions, and making recommendations to promote consistency in the supervision of financial institutions—and (2) the Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee—which is tasked with promoting information sharing and enhancing incident response planning, in addition to identifying cybersecurity best practices. Coordination is only effective if we are committed to work in an open, collaborative, and balanced way with other agencies and policymakers. There are unmet opportunities on this front. For example, the FFIEC is the venue in which regulators coordinate on examination standards and discuss and agree on reporting requirements that apply to smaller banks. With a growing divergence in the approach of state and federal regulators to the examination process, we need to ask how the FFIEC can better accomplish its goals. We also need to ask whether the other important work of the FFIEC, like establishing reporting requirements, is being conducted in an appropriate way. The opportunities for input, review, and oversight of this important work are very limited, with only the Board representative on the FFIEC participating. Notwithstanding these structural impediments, I have prioritized rationalizing the Call Report, an effort that I revived when I joined the Board. These types of overly broad requirements pose their own risks to community banks, and we should remember to focus on the unglamorous work of making sure we are not collecting more data than is necessary and appropriate for supervisory purposes, and that we are efficient in the collection of that data, for example, by leveraging data previously collected instead of requiring further collection of the same data. Regulators also tend to be very proprietary about the development of regulatory and supervisory proposals. Often, policies are far along in the development process before they are published for public comment in the rulemaking process, and state banking regulators rarely provide feedback on proposals before or after they are put out for comment. While regulators tasked with implementing regulations, supervision, and guidance bear the ultimate responsibility for those policy choices, this process can greatly benefit from more interaction among federal regulators and our state bank regulatory counterparts. More extensive dialogue with state regulators can improve proposals in the formulation stage by sharing practical, real-world perspectives, including observations on the impacts of intended and unintended consequences. While it is challenging to anticipate the unintended consequences of reforms, casting a wide net for views can lead to better, less disruptive, and better-informed policy choices. The importance of enhancing coordination between state regulators and the Federal Reserve cannot be overstated. At a recent meeting of the Board's Subcommittee on Smaller Regional and Community Banking, my colleagues and I were delighted to welcome representatives of the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and four of their State Bank Commissioner members. We learned firsthand about the successes, frustrations, concerns, and areas for improvement in the coordination between state and federal regulators. There is simply no substitute for these direct conversations and building upon and improving these important intergovernmental relationships. Collaborative Approach to ReformHistorically, one of the many virtues of the Federal Reserve Board is the structural incentive to work together to achieve compromise. Governors serve extended, staggered terms intended to insulate them from political considerations. The Board consists of seven independent governors who often bring their unique voices to a range of policy matters. While instances of dissent tend to attract the most attention, the Fed has a long history and tradition of engaging in thoughtful debate, exchange of views, and reaching more durable compromises on rulemaking matters. The history of consensus on bank regulatory matters is not surprising because we work toward common goals of safety and soundness and financial stability. Consensus is a powerful tool. When there is broad policy agreement, there tends to be moderation in approach, acting as a check on wild swings of the regulatory pendulum and providing banks and holding companies with an important degree of stability in their regulatory and supervisory expectations. While it is important for regulators to adapt to changing conditions, and to evolve in the face of new and emerging risks, this incremental approach tends to produce better policy and better outcomes in the banking system. The antithesis of this policymaking approach is one that involves the close guarding of information, limiting the airing of competing views, and failing to engage in meaningful discussion and debate about policy. When contrasting these two ends of the policymaking spectrum, the virtues of consensus-building are even more apparent. Regulatory reform should not be a "shock" to the banking system, and meaningful discussion and consensus act as a check on dramatic swings of the regulatory pendulum. Collaborative reform is more effective when we have both a widespread sharing of information, analysis, and policy perspectives, and when a range of views is brought to bear on important regulatory questions. One way that we can accomplish this goal is through representation of those with banking or state regulatory experience representing the Federal Reserve in bodies that are influential in the shaping of policy approaches, like the FFIEC, and by embracing a culture of freely sharing information among policymakers both within and across regulatory agencies. Assessing the Costs and Benefits of Existing Approaches and ReformToo often when regulators impose requirements on banks, the temptation is to overestimate the benefits and underestimate the costs. Requiring banks to report additional data allows us to better understand the operations of banks. Limiting the fees that may be charged to consumers may result in a short-run reduction in consumer costs. But in the long run, regulation carries with it many costs, ranging from the direct costs of compliance and capital to indirect costs like the reduction in product offerings or increased prices for consumers. Regulators must anticipate, assess, and balance these costs in the rulemaking process and accept that, at times, the right policy is not to impose additional regulations but rather to take actions to reduce the burden of existing regulatory requirements. One of the key challenges to pursuing this balancing is how to effectively complete the analysis. The incremental burden of any single regulatory reform may be challenging to measure—its costs may seem minor when weighed against the benefits. But this approach ignores the additional cost ofcumulativeburdens, a concern that is particularly acute among community banks faced with an onslaught of changes. If we ignore cumulative burdens, we risk more rapid and pronounced swings in the regulatory pendulum. These swings in approach risk not only our ability to effectively supervise banks, but banks' ability to effectively manage their business.15When faced with regulatory change, how does bank management review and provide meaningful comment on voluminous concurrent regulatory proposals that may build upon proposed, but not finalized regulations? When new rules are adopted, how can a bank ensure it has appropriate staffing and resources to ensure compliance? The cumulative burden of regulation is rarely acknowledged in the rulemaking process. While we assess burden with respect to discrete rule changes, there is no obligation to "refresh" that analysis due to changes in underlying conditions or new information about impact absent a further rule change. And the analysis of a rule focuses on theincrementalimpact of the specific regulation, ignoring the likely aggregate effect of requirements. While the minimum legal process required under the Administrative Procedure Act should be the "floor" for rulemaking, in my view it is insufficient. Likewise, while policymakers have even greater discretion in pursuing changes to supervision, we need not do so in a vacuum without opportunities for—and a receptiveness to—feedback. We can and should expand the lens through which we consider proposals, in a way that considers the cumulative effects of regulation and supervision on banks and their ultimate customers, in a way that identifies redundancies and excessive burdens, and in a way that considers multiple alternatives and the tradeoffs of different approaches. TailoringFinally, I would be remiss to discuss the future of community banking without noting one of the critical mechanisms to build a sensible framework for the future—tailoring. Tailoring helps us calibrate regulation and supervision to the activities and risks at every tier within our oversight framework, but it is particularly important when we think about the application of prudential tools to community banks. Tailoring our approach helps with the allocation of finite resources—among both banks and regulators. It enables us to right-size the approach to regulation and supervision to the complexity of banks, acknowledging that community banks that pose manageable risks in the event of their failure, and no real risk to financial stability, simply do not warrant the same treatment as larger, more complex, and more systemically interconnected banking institutions. While in some cases, policymakers have made efforts to promote appropriate tailoring, often the end result has been lacking. As I noted earlier, in my view the 2023 CRA reforms represent a missed opportunity to rationalize and right-size CRA requirements for community banks. Instead, the rule applied the same essential framework to all institutions above $2 billion in assets, scoping in community banks with the very largest global systemically important banks. Even where supervisory approaches take into account the needs of community banks, the end result requires reviewing and incorporating ever-increasing guidance into their risk management activities. This was certainly the case with regulatory guidance on third-party risk management. To be clear, tailoring is not only an efficient way to allocate resources, but the lack of tailoring poses a longer-term threat to the viability of community and smaller banks. As the banking system evolves, with new opportunities and new risks, the temptation is to simply increase the body of regulatory requirements, without doing the necessary work of "maintenance," to ensure that the set of requirements that applies to banking activities is appropriate.16 Often, our guidance has a "cumulative" or "compounding" effect—a bank cannot go to a single source or compendium to understand supervisory expectations or requirements for a particular activity. Instead, a banker must parse through multiple regulations and guidance before understanding how regulators expect an activity to be conducted. A community banking regulatory framework that enables small banks to thrive must prioritize tailoring. Closing ThoughtsThank you for your commitment to community banking, and conducting the important research that can inform the regulatory policy agenda. Community banks may be small but their contributions to local communities are mighty. The importance of their role in providing credit to a broad range of customers and businesses that in their absence would have far fewer banking options cannot be overstated. There simply is no alternative or replacement for community banks and the relationship banking model. If regulators believe in a dynamic banking system, if we support financial inclusion and extending the availability of banking access, we must acknowledge the importance of community banks and ensure that our regulatory framework preserves their role for the future. To function effectively, the banking system requires the presence of banks of all sizes—larger, regional, and community banks. This diversity of our financial institutions is the greatest strength of our banking system, and it can easily be imperiled by insufficiently targeted regulation, supervision, and guidance. The discussions we will have over the next two days will include steps to further preserve and enhance the future of community banking. The presentations will enhance our understanding of the dynamics and pressures that shape the banking system, identify issues and concerns that may threaten different bank business models and activities, and develop policy approaches that consider the tradeoffs in our regulatory and supervisory approach. 1. These remarks represent my own views and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Larger banks are defined using tests that look primarily at asset size but may include other metrics like cross-jurisdictional activity, nonbank assets, short-term wholesale funding, or off-balance sheet exposures.Return to text 3. For example, the "tailoring" rule in 2019 included a helpful visual that laid out the various standards and thresholds at which such standards applied across Category I-IV firms, and firms with more than $50 billion in assets. SeeBoard of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Tailoring Rule Visual, "Requirements for Domestic and Foreign Banking Organizations (PDF)" (October 10, 2019). We use a variety of asset-size thresholds to help define our current portfolios and establish thresholds for supervisory and regulatory expectations. These thresholds apply for banks with assets of $10 billion, $50 billion, $100 billion, $250 billion, and $750 billion. Some regulatory standards implement lower thresholds under the current $10 billion community bank asset threshold. See, e.g., 12 C.F.R. 228.12 (defining a "small bank" and "intermediate bank" for purposes of the regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment Act); 13 C.F.R. 121.201 (SBA regulations defining small business entities, including commercial banks with less than $850 million in assets).Return to text 4. Michelle W. Bowman, "Innovation and the Evolving Financial Landscape (PDF)" (speech at The Digital Chamber DC Blockchain Summit 2024, Washington, D.C., May 15, 2024); Michelle W. Bowman, "Innovation in the Financial System (PDF)" (speech at The Salzburg Global Seminar on Financial Technology Innovation, Social Impact, and Regulation, Salzburg, Austria, June 17, 2024).Return to text 5.Community Reinvestment Act (PDF), 89 Fed. Reg. 6574 (February 1, 2024).Return to text 6. See dissenting statement, "Statement on the Community Reinvestment Act Final Rule by Governor Michelle W. Bowman," news release, October 24, 2023.Return to text 7. As noted in the Board's most recent Supervision and Regulation Report, nearly half of the 1,340 supervisory findings for community banks were cited in these categories, more frequently than credit risk as of the fourth quarter of 2023. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Supervision and Regulation Report(PDF), (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2024) 22, figure 16.Return to text 8. Michelle W. Bowman, "Defining a Bank (PDF)" (Speech to the American Bankers Association 2024 Conference for Community Bankers, San Antonio, Texas, February 12, 2024);Statement on Third Party Risk Management Guidance by Governor Michelle W. Bowman(June 6, 2023), ("… Federal Reserve regional bank supervisors have indicated that we should provide additional resources for community banks upon implementation to provide appropriate expectations and ensure that small banks understand and can effectively use the guidance to inform their third-party risk management processes…. I am disappointed that the agencies failed to make the upfront investment to reduce unnecessary confusion and burden on community banks").Return to text 9. As I have noted in the past, even guidance with an applicability "threshold" may effectively establish new expectations even for much smaller banks. Michelle W. Bowman, "Tailoring, Fidelity to the Rule of Law, and Unintended Consequences (PDF)" (speech at the Harvard Law School Faculty Club, Cambridge, Massachusetts, March 5, 2024), ("[w]hen guidance notes that 'all financial institutions,regardless of size, may have material exposures to climate-related financial risks…,'my intuition is that banks will take little comfort from the nominal carveout [of banks with less than $100 billion in assets] in light of this language….").Return to text 10. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Bank Mergers and Acquisitions, and De Novo Bank Formation: Implications for the Future of the Banking System (PDF)" (speech at A Workshop on the Future of Banking, Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, April 2, 2024).Return to text 11. Michelle W. Bowman, "The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in Banking Reforms (PDF)" (speech at the 2023 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, October 4, 2023); Michelle W. Bowman, "The New Landscape for Banking Competition (PDF)," (speech at the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, September 28, 2022).Return to text 12. FDIC, "Final Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions (PDF)," (September 17, 2024).Return to text 13. 12 U.S.C. § 241.Return to text 14. Michelle W. Bowman, "Defining a Bank (PDF)," (speech at the American Bankers Association 2024 Conference for Community Bankers, San Antonio, Texas, February 12, 2024); Michelle W. Bowman, "New Year's Resolutions for Bank Regulatory Policymakers (PDF)," (speech at the South Carolina Bankers Association 2024 Community Bankers Conference, Columbia, South Carolina, January 8, 2024).Return to text 15. Michelle W. Bowman, "Bank Mergers and Acquisition, and De Novo Bank Formation: Implications for the Future of the Banking System (PDF)," (speech at a Workshop on the Future of Banking hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, April 2, 2024).Return to text 16. The banking agencies have an obligation under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 to review their regulations every 10 years to identify, with input from the public, outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulation and to consider how to reduce regulatory burden. See 12 U.S.C. § 3311.Return to text
Governor Christopher J. Waller At the Vienna Macroeconomics Workshop, Institute of Advanced Studies, Vienna, Austria Thank you for inviting me to speak today.1I have participated in this conference for nearly 20 years and have often presented my research on monetary theory, banking, and payments. So, I believe this is the right audience to speak to regarding the role of centralized finance and the emergence of decentralized finance, or defi for short. Over the past few years, there has been a lot of attention and work on defi, which will be a major focus of my remarks. Many argue that defi will replace traditional centralized finance while others argue that it merely extends traditional finance methods and trading activities onto new platforms. It is in this sense that I want to address the question of whether centralized finance and defi are substitutes or complements to each other. Advances associated with defi have the potential to profoundly affect financial market trading. While I believe these advances could lead to efficiency gains, I recognize the significant value that has been delivered for centuries by financial intermediaries and through centralized financial markets. Before I share my views on the promise of these new technologies, let me tell you where I'm coming from on these issues. I am an economist, and so my first inclination is to think about the underlying economics driving an issue. But to understand the value proposition of defi, it is useful to first recall whycentralizedfinancial market trading arose in the first place. Centralized finance clearly provides benefits to people, but obviously also comes with some costs. I am going to take a few minutes to discuss those benefits and costs before turning to the question at hand. Let's start with the economics of trading. Most financial trades are "pairwise" in that the seller of an object needs to find a buyer of that exact object. The problem is that it is often complicated, costly, and time-consuming to search for a buyer. This gives rise to the need for someone to step in and help buyers and sellers match in a faster and less costly manner. In short, there is a profit opportunity for someone to intermediate the trade. Another name for intermediaries is middlemen. Why would we pay a middleman? In their paper from nearly 40 years ago, Ariel Rubenstein and Asher Wolinsky described it eloquently: "What makes the middlemen's activity possible is the time-consuming nature of the trade, which enables middlemen to extract surplus in return for shortening the time period that sellers and buyers have to wait for a transaction."2 Let me contextualize the value of middlemen with an example I used for years when teaching money and banking. Suppose you had some extra income from saving and wanted to lend it out to earn interest. How would you do that? First, you would have to advertise that you had funds to lend. Then, you would have to wait for the right person who needed that exact amount of funds, which could be a long time. Once you met the right person, you would have to negotiate when repayment would occur. Next, you would need to know a lot of information about the person receiving your funds and the likelihood you would get repaid. This is needed to assess the risk of the transaction and the compensation you would need to give up your funds. You would also need a lot of legal advice to draw up a contract and stipulate how the contract would be enforced under a range of conditions. Finally, since you are the sole source of funding, you will bear the entire cost of a default. It should be clear that this would be a daunting exercise for most people and explains why they would turn to a middleman who specializes in this type of activity to do all this on their behalf. It is for these reasons that banks arose as early as in ancient Mesopotamia to carry out some of these functions.3Similar issues arise when it comes to other ways of transferring resources from one person to another, as occurs from non-bank debt, equities and insurance contracts. Many point to trades of shares in the Dutch East India Trading Company in Amsterdam in the 1660s as the origins of the first modern stock exchange. Lloyds of London was founded as a means of pooling funds to share risk and return in the shipping industry, thus becoming the first insurance firm. The fact that similar arrangements still exist centuries later is a testament to the value of intermediation and centralized financial trading. However, these arrangements are not without drawbacks. An obvious drawback of intermediation from the perspective of those wishing to trade is that those middlemen must get paid. That is, there are transaction costs. Another drawback of intermediation is that you typically must turn over control of your assets, such as savings or stocks, to the intermediary for them to be traded. This creates a classic "principal-agent" problem whereby incentives between the principal—you—and the agent—the intermediary—may not be aligned. That can raise concerns about custody arrangements and recourse to regain control of one's assets. Intermediation also requires recordkeeping arrangements that customers can trust accurately reflect their true holdings. In other words, centralized finance requires a substantial amount of trust. With all that in mind, let me turn to how and why technological innovations have given rise to defi. In a capitalist system, the existence of profits provides incentives for others to enter the market, offer a better product, and compete away any excess profits. This can be done by the creation of new financial firms that can provide the same or better service at a lower cost. Often that occurs through innovations and exploiting new technologies. Think about how the invention of the telegraph and the telephone revolutionized trading. More recently, the advent of the internet further advanced the ease and speed of financial trading. These are examples of how financial trading has evolved over time. And the next wave of innovations in financial market trading could be driven by technological advances that alleviate some potential drawbacks of the centralized approach. Often broad technological advances emanate from narrower efforts to design products or processes that solve specific problems. For example, one technology used to support portable home appliances like vacuum cleaners was originally developed to support the space program.4Similarly, the development of crypto-assets led to the development of technologies that are fueling possibilities in defi. We don't have enough time for me to cover the full history of crypto-assets, but I will focus on several key elements that have affected the evolution toward defi. An early crypto-asset—Bitcoin—was developed to function in a world in which trust among individuals did not exist. Rather than relying on intermediaries which require trust, Bitcoin relied on technology to facilitate trade. Bitcoin was also designed for privacy. No one would know who was buying or selling Bitcoin. This was achieved through cryptographic technology and private keys. In addition, it allowed individuals to maintain control of their crypto-assets throughout the entire trading process. That is, they no longer had to delegate control to others. Finally, all records were kept on a form of distributed ledger called a blockchain, which has design features that promote transparency and are censorship-proof. No individual or government could destroy the records of trades or take ownership of the objects traded. With that history in mind and before we delve into the question of whether defi and centralized finance are substitutes or complements, I think it is useful to carefully define some terms. This will make sure we're all talking about the same things. As I described in a speech last year, I think of the crypto ecosystem as consisting of three parts: It is easy to see how the emergence of these technologies could lead one to think of defi as asubstitutefor centralized finance. For example, the technologies are allowing for individuals to trade assets without giving up control of those assets to an intermediary—a critical distinction with centralized finance. However, there are other uses emerging from these technologies that look more likecomplementsto centralized finance. For example, distributed ledger technology, or DLT, may be an efficient and faster way to do recordkeeping in a 24/7 trading world. We already see several financial institutions experimenting with DLT for traditional repo trading that occurs 24/7. But before these ledgers can be used to facilitate transactions in traditional assets—like debt, equity, and real estate—these assets must be tokenized. Undertaking the process to tokenize assets and use distributed ledgers like blockchain can speed up transfers of assets and take advantage of another innovation: smart contracts. Rather than relying on each party to separately carry out the transaction, smart contracts can effectively combine multiple legs of a transaction into a single unified act executed by a smart contract. This can provide value as it can mitigate risks associated with settlement and counterparty risks by ensuring the buyer will not pay if the seller does not deliver. While these efforts are still in early stages, the functionality could expand to a broad set of financial activities. The bottom line is that things like DLT, tokenization, and smart contracts are just technologies for trading that can be used in defi or also to improve efficiency in centralized finance. That is why I see them as complements. Stablecoins are another important innovation in defi. Stablecoins were created in the crypto universe in hopes of providing a "safe" asset with a stable value for trading. Nearly all stablecoins are pegged to the U.S. dollar one-for-one. They provide an opportunity for buyers and sellers to transact in a decentralized fashion with the stablecoin used as the settlement instrument. Because they are effectively digital currency, stablecoins can reduce the need for payment intermediaries and thereby reduce costs of payments globally. But their safety is not assured. History is replete with cases in which synthetic dollars became subject to runs. Stablecoins thus face all of the same issues any substitute for genuine U.S. dollars faces. If appropriate guardrails can be erected to minimize run risk and mitigate other risks, such as their potential use in illicit finance, then stablecoins may have benefits in payments and by serving as a safe asset on a variety of new trading platforms. These technologies will almost certainly lead to efficiency gains over time, but as they develop, we should think carefully about their role in the broader financial landscape. Is it really possible to completely decentralize finance using these technologies? The answer is obviously "no." Intermediation is still valuable for the average person, and we see this by the existence of trading exchanges in the crypto world. All these platforms involve giving custody of one's crypto-assets to an intermediary, who conducts trades on behalf of the client. This reintroduces the need for trust in these platforms just as trust is needed in modern banking systems. Returning to the technologies behind defi, one must ask whether there are unique risks associated with the use of these technologies. If so, what is the nature of these risks? Are they contained to just those people directly engaging with the technologies, or could there be broader spillovers to society? For example, can these technologies increase the risk of inadvertently providing funds to bad actors? In centralized finance there are regulations that require banks to know who their clients are. Are similar rules and regulations needed around some of these new technologies? When it comes to our financial plumbing, which affects every person or business in one way or another, I think a balanced view of expeditious disruption and long-term sustainability is merited. So where does that leave us? Ultimately, I believe that advances in technology have the potential to drive efficiency gains in finance, just as technological innovation has done for centuries. While there are certain services emerging through defi that cannot be provided by centralized finance, the technological innovations stemming from defi are largely complementary to centralized finance. They have the potential to improve centralized finance, thereby increasing the significant value that financial intermediaries and centralized financial markets deliver. I look forward to seeing the continued evolution of financial technology and the benefits that evolution will bring to the households and businesses served by the financial system. 1. I would like to dedicate these remarks to an old friend and longtime participant of this conference, Paul Klein, who passed away unexpectedly two months ago. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinsky, "Middlemen,"The Quarterly Journal of Economics102 (August 1987): 581–93, https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-abstract/102/3/581/1887969.Return to text 3. See Benjamin Bromberg, "The origin of banking: religious finance in Babylonia (PDF),"The Journal of Economic History2 (May 1942): 77–88.Return to text 4. See National Aeronautics and Space Administration, "Spinoff from a Moon Tool (PDF)," January 1, 1981.Return to text 5. See Christopher J. Waller, "Thoughts on the Crypto Ecosystem" (speech at Global Interdependence Center Conference: Digital Money, Decentralized Finance, and the Puzzle of Crypto, La Jolla, CA, February 10, 2023).Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 18th Annual Community Bankers Symposium, Community Banking: Navigating a Changing Landscape, Chicago, Illinois Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good afternoon, I'd like to begin by thanking the event organizers, including our staff at the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors for inviting me to share my thoughts with you at the 18th Annual Community Bankers Symposium.1I always enjoy the opportunity to speak to bankers across the country and share perspectives on the issues facing the banking and financial system, especially when it's related to community banks. Banks are a critical component of the U.S. economy.2Their work often extends well beyond the provision of credit— providing services and volunteer and financial support within their community. Among many things, banks offer financial education, sponsorships and funding for community programs and events. Without question, community banks are important and integral to the local economy. But community banks also face challenges that require proactive risk management, effective and efficient prioritization of compliance resources, and the need to innovate. Today, I would like to briefly highlight some of the issues banks are facing and discuss ways that community banks and regulators can more effectively work together in the future. The Challenges Facing Community BanksAs this audience knows well, community banks face a number of challenges. They often rely on third-party service providers to offer products and services to their customers. It may be more difficult for them to hire and retain qualified staff or plan for future leadership with management succession planning. Given limited staffing, they may be overwhelmed by the recent onslaught of new regulations and guidance. And in light of all of this, it may be challenging to prioritize resources in order to appropriately focus on the most important risks facing their businesses. While the headwinds may seem overwhelming, community banks are always resilient in the face of change. Often, one of the greatest challenges facing a community bank is not about managing any particular risk but rather how to address all of the risks they face—and how toprioritizethe approach to address each of those risks. Regulators have, at times, exacerbated these challenges through policy choices. The risk of mis-prioritization is not limited to community banks. In my mind, this was most recently evident in the events and supervision leading to the failure of Silicon Valley Bank. Management failed to address growing interest rate risk and funding risks, and supervisors failed to prioritize and escalate these issues. Our goal should be to identify, understand, and learn from these past mistakes, and to avoid repeating them. Both regulators and banks should be working toward a common goal—a banking system that supports economic activity throughout the country, in which banks operate in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with consumer laws and regulations. In considering the challenges facing community banks, both regulators and banks have an important role to play. CompetitionCommunity banks face competitive pressures from many sources. These pressures may result from local or regional economic conditions, the needs of retail and business customers, and the products and services available in the market. Competitors can take the form of traditional banks, internet banks, and non-banks like fin-techs and mortgage companies. While fin-tech partnerships can be beneficial to both the customer and the bank, if the relationship is not managed according to safe and sound banking principles, serious problems can result. When deposits are accepted through fin-tech relationships but not handled appropriately, deposit insurance can be jeopardized and the ability to access deposited funds may be impacted.3 Competition can also come from other local competitors like credit unions, large banks with a broader operational footprint, payday lenders, or other nonbank credit sources. As bank customers grow increasingly comfortable and familiar with new mechanisms for doing business, the use of online banking has continued to expand. This has tended to increase the footprint of non-local banks or lenders, enabling them to effectively compete for business outside of their geographic area. Even against this backdrop, research shows that community banks have maintained an important role in many banking markets, including in small- and medium-sized business lending.4 The regulatory framework establishes expectations for how community banks can compete, and often creates an unlevel playing field with many of these competitors. This includes whether they are subject to the same regulation as banks that engage in the same activities and how competition is evaluated. A core concept in financial regulation is to impose the same regulation—and I suggest we expand this to include the same regulation, guidance, and supervisory expectations—on entities that are engaged in the same activities. Banks compete against many non-bank providers, including financial technology firms, credit unions, and other non-bank lenders. In some of these head-to-head competitions, community banks face distinct disadvantages that can pose challenges when competing for the same banking opportunities. For example, banks are subject to taxes and additional regulatory requirements (including the Community Reinvestment Act). They are also subject to a broader range of restrictions imposed by regulatory requirements or the "soft" power of supervision. In all of these cases, the disparity in the legal framework can have a distortive effect on competition. In short, where the financial regulatory framework can provide for parity of treatment, it should do so. The regulatory framework should not knowingly distort competition, or effectively impose a regulatory allocation of credit. The framework also plays an important role in assessing competition among banks. The mergers and acquisitions (M&A) approval process can have a disproportionate impact on community banks because the "screens" that are used to evaluate the competitive effects of a proposed merger often result in a finding that M&A transactions in rural markets can have an adverse effect on competition and should therefore be disallowed.5Even when these transactions are eventually approved, the mechanical approach to analyzing competitive effects—which is grounded in the effect of proposed transactions on the control of deposits within individual banking markets—often requires additional review or analysis, and can lead to delays in the regulatory approval process. CybersecurityCommunity banks often note cybersecurity and third-party risk management as areas that raise significant concerns. Cyber-related events, including ransomware attacks and business email compromises, are costly and time-consuming experiences, and they pose unique challenges for community banks. For example, the maintenance of and the technology resources required to support a successful cybersecurity program are often difficult for smaller banks. Regulators can promote cybersecurity, and stronger cyber-incident "resilience" and response capabilities by identifying resources and opportunities for banks to develop "muscle memory" in cyber incident response. Recent incidents, like the Crowdstrike-related outage, have highlighted the heavy dependence many banks have on technology, third-party providers, and the broader supply chain. In the current risk environment, it is important for banks of all sizes to implement sound operational resilience, cybersecurity, and third-party risk-management practices. One important resource for community banks is the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) website, which includes the FFIEC Cybersecurity Resource Guide and links to other external cybersecurity resources. The Federal Reserve plays an important role in supervising banks and supporting risk management practices. For example, the Federal Reserve hosts the Midwest Cyber Workshop, with the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis.6Over the past two years, this workshop has provided a forum to further cyber risk discussions among community bankers, regulators, law enforcement, and other industry stakeholders. Today's Symposium also includes an interactive cyber workshop, during which participants will participate in a cyber exercise, working through the various decisions that would be required in responding to a hypothetical cyberattack.7 We know well that cyber threats pose real risks to the banking system. We also recognize that community banks may have unique needs in preventing, remediating, and responding to cyber threats. Therefore, regulators should ensure that a range of resources are available to support community banks and seek further opportunities to help build community bank resilience against these threats. Third-Party Risk ManagementThird-party risk management can pose an additional challenge for community banks. Due to their size and scale, community banks often leverage centralized resources—technical experts who have greater expertise than the bank could fully maintain on staff—to advise and assist on a range of issues. Often these third-party service providers are significantly larger, and their bank clients—including smaller banks—may lack leverage in conducting due diligence and negotiating the terms of the relationship. In 2023, the federal banking agencies published supervisory guidance addressing third-party risk management, which was expressly applicable to community banks. As I noted at the time it was issued, the guidance included shortcomings that were known and identified but not addressed in advance.8 What many of you may not know is that after nearly a year from the original publication, the regulators published a guide to assist community banksinterpretandapplythe guidance to their third-party risk management activities. The guide was intended to provide additional context for the guidance—including step-by-step examples of how to address third-party risk management—making the guidance more useful. While I am pleased that the community bank implementation guide was eventually published, the delays in its publication suggest a shortcoming in our regulatory approach. We must ensure new guidance provides clarity to regulated firms on its own, or that we provide additional resources at the time the guidance is published. Consumer ComplianceLike third-party risk management, consumer compliance can be another area that may present challenges to community banks given their size and scale. An effective and well-run consumer compliance program balances consumer protection with the complexity and cost to establish a robust compliance management program. One challenge for community banks is the difficulty in retaining qualified consumer compliance experts. Notwithstanding these challenges, community banks devote significant time and resources to their consumer compliance risk management programs. Compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations, including fair lending laws, is essential to ensuring that the banking system provides fair and broad access to credit and financial services. Community banks take these responsibilities seriously, and the overwhelming majority of banks that we supervise invest in strong compliance management systems to prevent violations and detect problems before they occur. When consumer compliance concerns arise, banks address them by making their customers whole and adopting the necessary changes to ensure that issues do not persist or reoccur. In a very small subset of cases, banks fall short of their obligations, and we hold those institutions accountable through enforcement actions or other supervisory actions. The Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervision program is risk-focused and tailored to a bank's compliance risk, focused on the activities that present the greatest risk. One example related to third-party risk management is our recent system supervisory focus on consumer compliance risks associated with fin-tech relationships. As a result of this work, our supervisors seek to identify the parties to relationships that pose the greatest risk of consumer harm. This effort promotes our understanding of higher risk fin-tech partners across the Federal Reserve System, and helps supervisors proactively identify relationships that pose greater risk of consumer harm. Other Core RisksThere are a number of "core" risks that are essential for bank management to address. These "core" risks—including funding, liquidity and credit risk—should already be integrated into management priorities, since they pose the greatest threats to a bank's operations. Focusing on core risks is second nature for community banks. In contrast, supervision can be susceptible to diversion from core to non-core risks leading supervisors to neglect the build-up of traditional risk. Diverting resources to non-core risks can often leave a bank vulnerable, especially when regulators direct banks to allocate resources in other ways, whether by regulation, guidance, or through supervisory expectations. Mitigating Risks to Community BanksThe design of regulation, guidance, and supervisory approach regulators rely upon for community banks—and the intentional policy choices that underpin this framework—are important for ensuring their effectiveness in supporting the safety and soundness of the banking system. These design choices can enable community banks to operate successfully while mitigating risks, leveraging tailoring, transparency, and consistency across institutions.9I have spoken at length about these themes in the past, but I would like to reiterate just a few of the critical elements of a regulatory agenda that will allow community banks to thrive in the future: By no means is this proposal for regulatory reform exhaustive, but these critical components must be integrated into our future approach to ensure a diverse banking system for the future. Closing ThoughtsThank you for the opportunity to speak to you today, and for your commitment to community banking. You serve a critical role within the banking system, and in support of the U.S. economy. Your work to leverage the power of the community banking model enables you to serve your customers, promote financial inclusion and expand access to banking services. But policymakers have an important responsibility to make sure that the community banking model remains viable into the future. To function effectively, the banking system requires the presence of banks of all sizes—larger, regional, and community banks. This diversity of our financial institutions is the greatest strength of our banking system, and it can easily be imperiled by insufficiently targeted regulation, supervision, and guidance. 1. These remarks represent my own views and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Building a Community Banking Framework for the Future (PDF)" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 2, 2024).Return to text 3. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Arkansas State Bank Department, "In the Matter of Evolve Bancorp, Inc. and Evolve Bank & Trust, Cease and Desist Order (PDF)," news release, June 11, 2024.Return to text 4. Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, "Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 8752 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2002).Return to text 5. Michelle W. Bowman, "The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in Banking Reforms (PDF)" (speech at the 2023 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 4, 2023); Michelle W. Bowman, "The New Landscape for Banking Competition (PDF)," (speech at the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, September 28, 2022).Return to text 6. See Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Midwest Cyber Workshop 2024(June 25‑26, 2024).Return to text 7. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,Community Bankers Symposium(October 11, 2024).Return to text 8. Michelle W. Bowman, "Defining a Bank (PDF)" (Speech to the American Bankers Association 2024 Conference for Community Bankers, San Antonio, TX, February 12, 2024); Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman, "Third-Party Risk-Management Guidance," news release, June 6, 2023 ("...Federal Reserve regional bank supervisors have indicated that we should provide additional resources for community banks upon implementation to provide appropriate expectations and ensure that small banks understand and can effectively use the guidance to inform their third-party risk management processes…I am disappointed that the agencies failed to make the upfront investment to reduce unnecessary confusion and burden on community banks").Return to text 9. See Michelle W. Bowman, "Building a Community Banking Framework for the Future (PDF)" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, October 2, 2024).Return to text 10. See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking Organizations with Significant Trading Activity," 88 Fed. Reg. 64,028, 64,095 (September 18, 2023) ("[t]o reflect inflation since 1996 and growth in the capital markets, the agencies are proposing to increase the trading activity dollar threshold [applicable to the market risk rule] from $1 billion to $5 billion.").Return to text 11. FDIC, "Final Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions (PDF)," (September 17, 2024).Return to text
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the 2024 Women for Women Summit, Charleston, South Carolina Thank you for the kind introduction, Jennet.1Let me start by saying my thoughts are with all the people in Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia who have felt the force of Helene's and Milton's impact. I am saddened by the tragic loss of life and widespread disruption in this region. The Federal Reserve Board and other federal and state financial regulatory agencies are working with banks and credit unions in the affected area. As we normally do in these unfortunate situations, we are encouraging institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the needs of their communities.2 It is an honor to stand before you and speak to this group of audacious, innovative women. I am also very happy to be back in Charleston. I grew up in Milledgeville, Georgia, just about 250 miles down the road. Some of my fondest childhood memories of traveling in the South, especially as a Girl Scout, include South Carolina. Today I would like to talk with you about the important role startups, new businesses, and entrepreneurship play in our economy from the perspective of a Federal Reserve policymaker. I also want to share a bit of my story. Just like many of you—including those who have started a business or those who dream of doing that someday—I have faced and overcome hurdles along a winding path. My StoryI was born and raised in Milledgeville, where my mother, Professor Mary Murray Cook, was a faculty member in the Nursing Department of Georgia College and State University. She was the first tenured African American faculty member at that university. My father, Rev. Payton B. Cook, was a chaplain and then in senior leadership at the hospital there. My family lived through the events that brought Milledgeville out of a deeply segregated South. My sisters and I were among the first African American students to desegregate the schools we attended. I drew strength from the example set by my family, others in the Civil Rights Movement, and the village that raised me and from their conviction in the hope and promise of a world that could and would continually improve. While I had an interest in economics even before I entered high school, that was not the initial field of study I pursued. I entered Spelman College in Atlanta as a physics and philosophy major. After graduation, I had the honor of studying at the University of Oxford as a Marshall Scholar. After Oxford, I continued my education at the University of Dakar in Senegal in West Africa. However, at the end of my year in Africa, it was the chance to climb Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania in East Africa where I discovered my love of economics. I hiked alongside a British economist, and, by the end of the trek, he convinced me that studying economics would provide me with the tools to address some big and important questions I had pondered for a long time. I went on to earn my Ph.D. in economics from the University of California, Berkeley. Entering the economics profession came with its usual challenges, and, for women, a few more challenges existed. To this day, women are still underrepresented in economics. Women earned just 34 percent of bachelor's degrees in economics and 36 percent of Ph.D.'s in economics in 2022, the most recent available data from the U.S. Department of Education. The share of women earning those degrees rose only modestly from 1999, when women earned about 32 percent of economics bachelor's degrees and 27 percent of Ph.D.'s. The data stand in sharp contrast to all science and engineering degrees, including in social science fields, where women earned roughly half of degrees granted in 2022.3 Education was paramount in my family and was construed as a means of realizing the promise of the Civil Rights Movement and continual improvement of our society and economy. Of course, economics, like physics, is a field where math skills are vitally important. Between my mother, my aunts, and my extended family, I had essentially understood STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)-related jobs to be women's work. I was grateful to have these role models in my orbit to give me the confidence to undertake study in a STEM field. Access and encouragement for girls to pursue study in math and science are a significant concern. Economist Dania V. Francis's research shows that Black girls are disproportionately under-recommended for Advanced Placement calculus.4The course is often a gateway for economics, for STEM classes, and for college preparation, in general.5 My mentors and role models encouraged careful study, teaching, and scholarship and helped me block out the voices saying I did not belong at each juncture. They encouraged my work and have been champions for me. As a result, I have been committed to serving as a mentor, as well. For several years, I was the director of and taught in the American Economic Association's Summer Program, an important training ground for disadvantaged students considering economics careers. Each year, the share of students who are women oscillated between 41 percent and 67 percent, much higher than the enrollment in undergraduate economics courses nationally.6I told those students—and continue to tell them as they make their way through graduate programs in economics and through the economics profession—"You belong here. Your insights are unique, and the profession will benefit from them." In my career as an economist, I studied, researched, and taught in roles at universities and worked in the private sector and in government before I was nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate to become a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 2022. I am honored and humbled to serve in this role and proud to be the first African American woman and first woman of color to serve on the Board of Governors. As Fed policymakers, we make decisions affecting the entire economy and the well-being of every American by focusing on the dual mandate given to us by Congress: maximum employment and stable prices. Entrepreneurs' Vital Role in the EconomyIn my years of conducting research and while at the Board, I have met many inventors, innovators, and entrepreneurs who made important contributions to the economy. Many of them happened to be women who were very knowledgeable, creative, and inspiring. So I want to discuss the vital role entrepreneurship and new business creation play in our economy. You might ask what interest I have in this subject, as a monetary policymaker focused closely on the dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. Well, this topic has interested me for a long time, and I conducted a fair amount of research on entrepreneurship and innovation before joining the Board. But the topic is also important precisely because of our dual mandate. To convince you of this, I will explain a few of the ways in which economists think about entrepreneurship, and how they relate to the dual mandate. The first is the most basic: For many people—many millions, in fact—entrepreneurship or self-employment is a career choice.7It is their preferred way of participating in the labor market and obtaining income for themselves and their families. They prefer to be their own bosses, with all the benefits and risks that entails.8But whether they end up hiring others or not, self-employed individuals support the labor market by providing a job for themselves. A second way economists think about entrepreneurship is a little broader: New business creation is a large contributor to overall job growth. In fact, new businesses punch above their weight. For example, during the handful of years before the pandemic, in a typical year only about 8 percent of all employer firms were new entrants, but these new entrants accounted for about 15 percent of annual gross job creation.9And research has found that this job creation effect is long lasting. Even though many new firms do not survive, those that do survive tend to grow rapidly over 5 to 10 years, largely offsetting the job losses from those firms that shut down.10 A third way economists think about entrepreneurship, which I have explored in my own research, is that a small but critical subset of new firms are innovators—they introduce new products or business processes that change how we consume or produce.11As such, they make large contributions to overall productivity growth over time. That is, innovative entrepreneurs help enable us to do more with less—and even more so if access to innovation participation is equitable.12It is important that everyone, including women, historically underrepresented groups, people from certain geographic regions, and other diverse representative groups, can participate in the entrepreneurship and innovation economy. In my research, I have found that investors underrate the prospects of Black-founded, or simply outsider-founded, startups in early funding stages. Better assessment of the early stages of invention and innovation could broaden the range of new entrants and the ideas they contribute to their local communities and the broader economy. Consider the Dual MandateSo let's return to the dual mandate. You can now understand that self-employment and entrepreneurial job creation are relevant for our employment mandate. Indeed, one could argue that entrepreneurs are critical to Fed policymakers' efforts to promote maximum employment. And the productivity gains we reap from entrepreneurship are like productivity growth from any other source. When the pace of productivity growth increases, it allows for economic activity and wage growth to be robust while also being consistent with price stability. The importance of business startups to our dual mandate objectives is why I have watched closely as various measures of new business formation have surged since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Applications for new businesses jumped to a record pace shortly after the pandemic struck the U.S.13The pace of applications has remained elevated above pre-pandemic norms all the way from the summer of 2020 to the most recent data, even though the pace appears to be cooling some this year.14At first, it might have seemed like these business applications were mainly being submitted by people who lost their jobs, or perhaps by an increase in "gig economy" work. There was doubtless some of that going on, but research and data since then have painted a more optimistic picture. When researchers look across areas of the country, the pandemic business applications had only a weak connection with layoffs. The surge in applications persisted long after overall layoffs fell to the subdued pace we have seen since early 2021. The applications did have a strong relationship with workers voluntarily leaving their jobs. Some quitting workers may have chosen to join these new businesses as founders or early employees. And surging business applications were soon followed by new businesses hiring workers and expanding. Over the last two years of available data, new firms created 1.9 million jobs per year, a pace not seen since the eve of the Global Financial Crisis.15 The industry patterns of this surge reflect shifts in consumer and business needs resulting from the pandemic and its aftermath. For example, in large metro areas, new business creation shifted from city centers to the suburbs, perhaps because of the increase in remote work. Suddenly, people wanted to eat lunch or go to the gym closer to their home, rather than close to their downtown office. Likewise, consumer and business tastes for more online purchases, with the shipping requirements that entails, are evident in the surge of business entry in the online retail and transportation sectors. But this is not only about moving restaurants closer to workers or changing patterns of goods consumption. There was also a particularly strong entry into high-tech industries, such as data processing and hosting, as well as research and development services.16That may have more to do with developments like artificial intelligence than with the pandemic specifically, as I discussed in a speech in Atlanta last week.17 Economists will spend years debating the various causes of the surge in business creation during and soon after the pandemic. Perhaps strong monetary and fiscal policy backstopping aggregate demand played some role, or pandemic social safety net policies, or simply the accommodative financial conditions of 2020 and 2021.18Indeed, more research is needed and will be the subject of many dissertations in the near future. I do think a large part of the story is ultimately a case of resourceful and determined American entrepreneurs, perhaps including some of you, responding to the tumultuous shocks of the pandemic. They, like some of you, stepped in to meet the rapidly changing needs of households and businesses. This points to a fourth way economists like to think about entrepreneurship, which is that entrepreneurship plays a big role in helping the economy adapt to change. Research suggests that entrepreneurs and the businesses they create are highly responsive to big economic shocks, and the COVID-19 pandemic was certainly a seismic shock.19To be sure, the future is uncertain. It is unclear what the productivity effects of the pandemic surge of new businesses, particularly in high tech, will be.20And whether that surge will continue is an open question; after all, the pre-pandemic period was a period of declining rates of new business creation, and the pandemic surge itself does appear to be cooling off recently.21 ConclusionFor now, let me say that I am grateful that entrepreneurs continue to give us a hand in meeting our employment mandate, and whatever productivity gains we may reap in coming years as a result may help ease tradeoffs with inflation as well. Finally, I will share one last story about why South Carolina will always hold a special place in my and my sisters' hearts. Every summer and at Thanksgiving, we would travel through the Palmetto State to our grandparents' house in Winston-Salem. Sitting in the back seat of the station wagon, we were entranced by the many colorful signs along Interstate 95 advertising what I, as a child, viewed as South Carolina's number one attraction: the South of the Border roadside amusement park. We begged our parents to stop every time. It was an epic struggle that went on for more than a decade. Once or twice they did relent, a sweet childhood victory! And here is the funny thing about travels—paths can cross. The timing is such that my sisters and I may have even been helped by a waiter named Ben, a young man from Dillon, South Carolina, who would go on to be Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke!22Perhaps it was the world's way of foreshadowing. Thank you for having me here in Charleston. It is inspiring to meet this group of bold, entrepreneurial women in South Carolina, and I look forward to continuing our conversation. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and State Financial Regulators (2024), "Federal and State Financial Regulatory Agencies Issue Interagency Statement on Supervisory Practices regarding Financial Institutions Affected by Hurricane Helene," joint press release, October 2.Return to text 3. See U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, Completions Survey, available on the NCES website athttps://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/survey-components/7.Return to text 4. See Dania V. Francis, Angela C.M. de Oliveira, and Carey Dimmitt (2019), "Do School Counselors Exhibit Bias in Recommending Students for Advanced Coursework?"B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,vol. 19 (July), pp. 1–17.Return to text 5. See Lisa D. Cook and Anna Gifty Opoku-Agyeman (2019), "'It Was a Mistake for Me to Choose This Field,'"New York Times,September 30.Return to text 6. See Lisa D. Cook and Christine Moser (2024), "Lessons for Expanding the Share of Disadvantaged Students in Economics from the AEA Summer Program at Michigan State University,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 38 (Summer), pp. 191–208.Return to text 7. There is no single way to measure the number of self-employed individuals and related businesses, but it certainly numbers in the millions. The latest Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey indicates there are roughly 10 million unincorporated and 7 million incorporated self-employed individuals. Separate data on businesses from the U.S. Census Bureau indicate that, as of 2021, there were about 25 million nonemployer and 800,000 employer sole proprietorships (Nonemployer Statistics;Statistics of U.S. Businesses). For analysis of inconsistencies between self-employment data sources, see Katharine G. Abraham, John C. Haltiwanger, Claire Hou, Kristin Sandusky, and James R. Spletzer (2021), "Reconciling Survey and Administrative Measures of Self-Employment,"Journal of Labor Economics,vol. 39 (October), pp. 825–60.Return to text 8. See Erik Hurst and Benjamin Wild Pugsley (2011), "What Do Small Businesses Do? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,Fall, pp. 73–142; and Erik G. Hurst and Benjamin W. Pugsley (2017), "Wealth, Tastes, and Entrepreneurial Choice," in John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, eds.,Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 9. Gross job creation refers to all jobs created by entering and expanding establishments. Data are from the Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics, averaged for 2015–19. New firms' share of net job creation is much higher, but this is partly an artifact of measurement practices: Firms with an age less than one measured in annual data cannot contribute negatively to net job creation.Return to text 10. See John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013), "Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large versus Young,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 95 (May), pp. 347–61; and Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24.Return to text 11. For evidence on the importance of innovating young and small firms, see Daron Acemoglu, Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William Kerr (2018), "Innovation, Reallocation, and Growth,"American Economic Review,vol. 108 (November), pp. 3450–91. For recent trends in technology diffusion of relevance to business entry, see Ufuk Akcigit and Sina T. Ates (2023), "What Happened to US Business Dynamism?"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 131 (August), pp. 2059–2124.Return to text 12. See Lisa D. Cook (2011), "Inventing Social Capital: Evidence from African American Inventors, 1843–1930,"Explorations in Economic History,vol. 48 (December), pp. 507–18; Lisa D. Cook (2014), "Violence and Economic Activity: Evidence from African American Patents, 1870–1940,"Journal of Economic Growth,vol. 19 (June), pp. 221–57; and Lisa D. Cook (2020), "Policies to Broaden Participation in the Innovation Process (PDF)," Hamilton Project Policy Proposal 2020-11 (Washington: Brookings Institution, August).Return to text 13. "Business applications" refers to applications for new Employer Identification Numbers submitted to the Internal Revenue Service. These are reported by the U.S. Census Bureau in the Business Formation Statistics. An application does not necessarily mean an actual firm with employees, revenue, or both will result.Return to text 14. Unless otherwise noted, the facts described in this section are documented in Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), "Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: A Brief Update," working paper, September; and Ryan A. Decker and John Haltiwanger (2023), "Surging Business Formation in the Pandemic: Causes and Consequences? (PDF)"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 249–302.Return to text 15. Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Business Employment Dynamics (BED) report new firm job creation of 1.9 million, on average, in 2022 and 2023, the highest pace since 2007. Alternative data on firm births from the Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics, which lag the BED by one year, report 2.5 million jobs created by new firms in 2022, also the highest pace since 2007.Return to text 16. See Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), "High Tech Business Entry in the Pandemic Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 19).Return to text 17. See Lisa D. Cook (2024), "Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, and the Path Ahead for Productivity," speech delivered at "Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications of AI, Big Data, and Remote Work," a conference organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Richmond, Atlanta, October 1.Return to text 18. For a potential role of fiscal policy, see Catherine E. Fazio, Jorge Guzman, Yupeng Liu, and Scott Stern (2021), "How Is COVID Changing the Geography of Entrepreneurship? Evidence from the Startup Cartography Project," NBER Working Paper Series 28787 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May). For safety net programs (specifically expanded unemployment insurance), see Joonkyu Choi, Samuel Messer, Michael Navarrete, and Veronika Penciakova (2024), "Unemployment Benefits Expansion and Business Formation," working paper, April. For the importance of financial conditions for entrepreneurship in past business cycles, see Michael Siemer (2019), "Employment Effects of Financial Constraints during the Great Recession,"Review of Economics and Statistics,vol. 101 (March), pp. 16–29; and Teresa C. Fort, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013), "How Firms Respond to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,"IMF Economic Review,vol. 61 (3), pp. 520–59.Return to text 19. Examples of research finding a large role for business entry in responding to aggregate shocks include Manuel Adelino, Song Ma, and David Robinson (2017), "Firm Age, Investment Opportunities, and Job Creation,"Journal of Finance,vol. 72 (June), pp. 999–1038; Ryan A. Decker, Meagan McCollum, and Gregory B. Upton, Jr. (2024), "Boom Town Business Dynamics,"Journal of Human Resources,vol. 59 (March), pp. 627–51; and Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Ayşegűl Şahin (2024), "Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,"American Economic Review,vol. 114 (July), pp. 1986–2023.Return to text 20. The last period of robust productivity growth in the U.S., the late 1990s and early 2000s, was preceded by several years by strong business creation in high-tech industries; see Lucia Foster, Cheryl Grim, John C. Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf (2021), "Innovation, Productivity Dispersion, and Productivity Growth," inCarol Corrado, Jonathan Haskel, Javier Miranda, and Daniel Sichel, eds.,Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the Twenty-First Century(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).Return to text 21. The number of annual new firms as a share of all firms declined from around 12 percent in the 1980s, on average, to around 9 percent in the period of 2010–19. New firms' share of gross job creation declined from nearly 20 percent to less than 15 percent over the same period. Data are from Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics. The pre-pandemic trend decline in entry rates was documented by Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24.Return to text 22. See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Brief Remarks," speech delivered at the Interstate Interchange Dedication Ceremony, Dillon, S.C., March 7.Return to text
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve Board, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and state financial regulators, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Helene on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the current disaster areas can be found athttps://www.fema.gov/disaster/declarations. Lending:The agencies encouragefinancial institutions to work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Helene. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas are supported by the agencies and should not be subject to examiner criticism. In accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, institutions should individually evaluate modifications of existing loans to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings or modifications to borrowers experiencing financial difficulty, as applicable. In making this evaluation, institutions should consider the facts and circumstances of each borrower and modification. In supervising institutions affected by Hurricane Helene, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after Hurricane Helene. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by Hurricane Helene. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by Hurricane Helene may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Helene that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of Hurricane Helene. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, refer to the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Institutions are encouraged to monitor municipal securities and loans affected by Hurricane Helene. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by the disaster and encourage institutions to engage in appropriate monitoring and take prudent efforts to stabilize such investments. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: State Financial Regulators:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/disaster/hurricane-helene-2024 FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision/letters-credit-unions-other-guidance/examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Resources: Hurricane Helene
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve Board, the Florida Office of Financial Regulation, the National Credit Union Administration, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, collectively the agencies, recognize the serious impact of Hurricane Milton on the customers and operations of many financial institutions and will provide appropriate regulatory assistance to affected institutions subject to their supervision. The agencies encourage institutions operating in the affected areas to meet the financial services needs of their communities. A complete list of the current disaster areas can be found athttps://www.fema.gov/disaster/declarations. Lending:The agencies encouragefinancial institutions to work constructively with borrowers in communities affected by Hurricane Milton. Prudent efforts to adjust or alter terms on existing loans in affected areas are supported by the agencies and should not be subject to examiner criticism. In accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, institutions should individually evaluate modifications of existing loans to determine whether they represent troubled debt restructurings or modifications to borrowers experiencing financial difficulty, as applicable. In making this evaluation, institutions should consider the facts and circumstances of each borrower and modification. In supervising institutions affected by Hurricane Milton, the agencies will consider the unusual circumstances these institutions face. The agencies recognize that efforts to work with borrowers in communities under stress can be consistent with safe-and-sound practices as well as in the public interest. Temporary Facilities:The agencies understand that many financial institutions face staffing, power, telecommunications, and other challenges in re-opening facilities after Hurricane Milton. In cases in which operational challenges persist, the primary federal and/or state regulator will expedite, as appropriate, any request to operate temporary facilities to provide more convenient availability of services to those affected by Hurricane Milton. In most cases, a telephone notice to the primary federal and/or state regulator will suffice initially to start the approval process, with necessary written notification being submitted shortly thereafter. Publishing Requirements:The agencies understand that the damage caused by Hurricane Milton may affect compliance with publishing and other requirements for branch closings, relocations, and temporary facilities under various laws and regulations. Institutions experiencing disaster-related difficulties in complying with any publishing or other requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator. Regulatory Reporting Requirements:Institutions affected by Hurricane Milton that expect to encounter difficulty meeting the agencies' reporting requirements should contact their primary federal and/or state regulator to discuss their situation. The agencies do not expect to assess penalties or take other supervisory action against institutions that take reasonable and prudent steps to comply with the agencies' regulatory reporting requirements if those institutions are unable to fully satisfy those requirements because of Hurricane Milton. The agencies' staffs stand ready to work with affected institutions that may be experiencing problems fulfilling their reporting responsibilities, taking into account each institution's particular circumstances, including the status of its reporting and recordkeeping systems and the condition of its underlying financial records. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA):Financial institutions may receive CRA consideration for community development loans, investments, or services that revitalize or stabilize federally designated disaster areas in their assessment areas or in the states or regions that include their assessment areas. For additional information, refer to the Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment athttps://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm. Investments:Institutions are encouraged to monitor municipal securities and loans affected by Hurricane Milton. The agencies realize local government projects may be negatively affected by the disaster and encourage institutions to engage in appropriate monitoring and take prudent efforts to stabilize such investments. For more information, refer to theInteragency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster, which is available as follows: FDIC:https://www.fdic.gov/news/disaster FRB:https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1714a1.pdf NCUA:https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision/letters-credit-unions-other-guidance/examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster OCC:https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2017/bulletin-2017-61.html State financial regulators:https://www.csbs.org/interagency-supervisory-examiner-guidance-institutions-affected-major-disaster Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Resources: Hurricane Milton
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the termination of the enforcement action listed below: Citigroup Inc., New York, New YorkCease and Desist Order dated March 21, 2013Terminated September 26, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday fined Toronto-Dominion Bank $123.5 million for violations related to anti-money laundering laws. The Board is also requiring TD to implement enhanced measures to comply with anti-money laundering laws and to correct its risk management deficiencies. TD failed to conduct adequate risk management and oversight of its retail banking operations in the United States, resulting in a U.S. subsidiary being used to launder hundreds of millions of dollars in illicit proceeds. The Board's action will help ensure that TD operates in compliance with all U.S. laws and regulations. The Board is requiring TD to: Canada's Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, the home country supervisor of TD, can act in the implementation of these requirements as permitted by its legal authority. This action is being taken in conjunction with criminal and regulatory actions that are being taken by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey, the Department of the Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. The penalties announced by the agencies total approximately $3.09 billion. The bank is also pleading guilty to criminal charges brought by law enforcement authorities. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement action listed below: U & I Financial Corp., Lynnwood, Washington and UniBank, Lynnwood, WashingtonWritten Agreement dated October 21, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Opportunity Bank of Montana, Helena, MontanaFlood insurance violations, civil money penalty, dated September 30, 2024 Consent cease and desist order against Lindsay GravesFormer employee of Bank of Jackson Hole, Jackson, WyomingMisappropriation of documents, including confidential supervisory information Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday released the minutes from its recent meetings to review and determine the discount rates provided to depository institutions through the discount window. Today's minutes cover the Board meetings that occurred on September 9 and 18, 2024. The Board's process for setting the discount rate is distinct from the process the Federal Open Market Committee follows in setting the target range for the federal funds rate. For media inquiries, please e-mail[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on September 17–18, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board’swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeSeptember 17-18, 2024:HTML|PDF
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Eighth Annual Fintech Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar]toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows]seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows]increase/decrease volume; [M]toggles mute on/off; [F]toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The[Tab]key may be used in combination with the[Enter/Return]key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good morning.1It is a pleasure to join you for the second day of the Eighth Annual Fintech Conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. While I am disappointed not to be able to join you in person this morning, I am pleased to be among the more than 1,000 participants joining today's discussion online. The agenda today promises to be just as informative and thought-provoking as yesterday's session. Given that this conference provides an opportunity to engage in discussions about fintech and its importance in the financial services industry, I'd like to reiterate something I have highlighted a number of times in the past. Regulators have an obligation to understand the functionality of new innovations, including the benefits that innovation can bring and the accompanying risks.2Conferences like this enable us to expand our knowledge and understanding of these benefits and risks by bringing together experts throughout the financial system to discuss important developments and emerging issues related to financial technology. These discussions help to inform our work throughout the Federal Reserve System. Often the pace of technological change can be rapid. New or improving technologies have the potential to make our banking system faster and more efficient. They can result in both lowering the cost of and expanding the availability of products and services for consumers. But they can also carry risks. To be effective in the face of this ongoing evolution, regulators must be aware of the potential risks and how existing technology could be leveraged for new services. Therefore, we must remain vigilant but nimble in our approach. This requires us to recognize and follow three innovation related principles: First, we must be willing to develop an understanding of new technology. Second, we must be open in considering how we approach innovation. And finally, we must prioritize how we integrate innovation as we revise or enhance regulatory frameworks. Turning back to why we are here today: This conference was launched back in 2017. It has grown in standing and relevance every year since. As President Harker noted in his remarks yesterday, the conference has become a System highlight because of its ability to focus on and keep pace with the change of technology. This conference also embodies the principles I just articulated of working to understand new technologies, having an openness to innovation, and considering policy choices that enable integration of financial technology in the banking and financial system. Year-after-year, this event provides an opportunity for us to come together to engage and learn about fintech issues, keeping an eye toward the future. But we must recognize that the success and growth of this conference is due to the leadership and vision of President Harker. For those who may not be aware, at the end of June next year, President Harker will reach the Federal Reserve retirement requirements, and unfortunately, this will be his final Fintech Conference as President and CEO of the Philadelphia Fed. I want to congratulate Pat on the creation and success of this conference, and to look forward to the ongoing and future legacy he has created for the Philadelphia Reserve Bank with this event. President Harker is, by his own admission, an "accidental economist." He's an engineer first and, in fact, came to the field of economics through an engineering issue that required economics to solve. Well, as someone who has sat at the Federal Open Market Committee conference table with President Harker for the past six years, I can attest to this approach—he enlists this engineering perspective to assist in understanding economic issues. That methodical approach to issues, and his willingness to look deep under the proverbial hood, is his hallmark at the Philadelphia Fed. Through his leadership, the Bank has built strong partnerships with communities throughout the Third District who know they can rely on this institution for expert knowledge and data research that are critical to working through local concerns. It was also under his leadership that the Philadelphia Fed's Consumer Finance Institute took its current shape. Today, the Institute's multidisciplinary approach to issues—bringing together economists, industry and regulatory experts, and community development specialists—is redefining our understanding of consumer credit and payments. And, he has positioned the Philadelphia Fed as a true thought leader in technology and innovation, and in the application of both hard and soft data. This conference is just the most public example of this. His decision, nearly a decade ago, to give the green light to a conference specifically geared to fintech proves that President Harker is clearly standing in the center of the intersection of engineering and economics. So, while I do not wish to detract from any of our speakers, panelists, and presenters today, I must recognize and thank President Harker for his forward-looking leadership. The Third District and the Federal Reserve System are both better for his service. Pat, thank you! To close, thank you again for allowing me these few moments to start the day. I look forward to today's discussion and to our conversations. 1. These remarks represent my own views and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. Michelle W. Bowman,"Innovation in the Financial System"(speech at the Salzburg Global Seminar on Financial Technology Innovation, Social Impact, and Regulation: Do We Need New Paradigms?, Salzburg, Austria, June 17, 2024).Return to text
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson At the Charlotte Economics Club, Charlotte, North Carolina Thank you, Steve, for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to talk to this group today.1 Let me start by saying that I am saddened by the tragic loss of life, destruction, and damage resulting from Hurricane Helene in North Carolina, and throughout this region. My thoughts are with the people and communities affected. For our part, the Federal Reserve and other federal and state financial regulatory agencies are working with banks and credit unions in the affected area to help make sure they can continue to meet the financial services needs of their communities. Yesterday I shared my historical perspective on the discount window at Davidson College.2In 1913, when the Federal Reserve was established, the discount window was the main tool it used to provide the nation with a safer, more flexible, and more stable monetary and financial system. More than 110 years later, the discount window continues to play an important role in supporting the liquidity and stability of the banking system, and the effective implementation of monetary policy. Today I would like to discuss with you how the discount window has evolved in the 21st century, including recent steps the Federal Reserve Board has taken to solicit feedback from the public on discount window operations. Before I address our most recent efforts, however, I will review some important episodes in discount window history that brought us to where we are today. First, I will recount briefly events in the 1980s and early 1990s that provide important context for the reappraisal of the discount window in the early 2000s. Second, I will summarize revisions to the discount window that the Fed made in 2003 and some additional changes made since then. Third, I will describe efforts that the Fed has taken to ensure that the discount window remains effective today, including the request for information that the Board recently issued on operational aspects of the discount window and intraday credit. After completing my discussion of the discount window, I will conclude with my outlook for the U.S. economy. Events before the 2003 Discount Window RevisionsI would like to pick up today where I left off yesterday in my speech at Davidson College: the 1980s and early 1990s. This was a period of widespread problems in the commercial banking sector. Troubled institutions borrowed from the discount window for extended periods of time as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) sought to find merger partners or otherwise manage the closure of these institutions. As a result, the discount window became associated strongly with lending to troubled institutions. Healthy banks' reluctance to borrow from the discount window increased. The greater reluctance to borrow from the discount window made it less effective both as a monetary policy tool and as a crisis-fighting tool.3This led to a reassessment of the discount window in the early 2000s and to eventual revisions implemented in 2003. A Reassessment of the Discount Window in the Early 2000sThe key challenge in the reassessment of the discount window was to establish a lending program that would not only operate effectively and support monetary policy implementation, but also mitigate moral hazard and provide sufficient controls to minimize risk to Reserve Banks and, ultimately, to American taxpayers. After the reassessment, the Fed implemented several changes aimed to achieve the right balance. The Board replaced the adjustment credit program, which was extended at a below-market rate, with a new type of discount window credit called primary credit. This new type of discount window credit became effective in 2003.4It is available as a backup source of liquidity to depository institutions in generally sound financial condition at an above-market rate. Making the discount rate a penalty rate is more consistent with the long-standing practice of other major central banks. This feature was intended to reduce the need for administrative pressures based on Reserve Bank staff judgment of inappropriate usage when the discount rate was below market rates. Although those measures effectively limited usage that was deemed inappropriate at the time, they also presented communication challenges regarding when it was appropriate to use the discount window and perpetuated the perception that the Fed discouraged its use. Primary credit is a "no questions asked" facility in which eligible depository institutions are no longer required to have exhausted other sources of funding or be subject to restrictions on the use of the borrowed funds. The Fed initially set the primary credit rate 100 basis points above the target federal funds rate.5Since March 2020, the Fed has set the primary credit rate at a level equal to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate.6 At the same time primary credit was established, another new program, called secondary credit, replaced the extended credit program. Secondary credit is available to depository institutions that are not eligible for primary credit. It was initially available at an interest rate 50 basis points higher than the primary credit rate, which is the spread in effect today. In contrast to primary credit, extensions under secondary credit are subject to higher collateral discounts and may involve ongoing oversight on the use of funds obtained under the program, reflecting the less-sound condition of secondary credit borrowers. Typically, Reserve Banks review a depository institution's plan to repay the loan and return to market sources of funding. This two-tiered structure of providing the no-questions-asked primary credit program for healthy depository institutions and the secondary credit program for less-than-healthy depository institutions was designed primarily to instill public confidence in the health of institutions borrowing from the primary credit program and to reduce the reluctance of healthy depository institutions to borrow.7In addition, having two separate facilities would reinforce the notion that healthy and troubled depository institutions alike should regard borrowing from the Fed as an option in the event of a need for additional funds. In the early years of the switch to the new facilities, there were signs that healthy depository institutions became more willing to borrow from the discount window. For example, some research found that after the 2003 discount window revisions, banks borrowed more from the discount window when the federal funds rate spiked than they had previously.8This finding suggests that the redesign of the discount window was effective in reducing banks' reluctance to borrow. As a result, the discount window may have been more effective in placing a ceiling on short-term funding rates, aiding the implementation of monetary policy, and serving as a liquidity tool when needed. Nevertheless, it is important to acknowledge that it is difficult to measure reluctance to borrow from the discount window. When the interest rate on primary credit is above the target federal funds rate and the federal funds rate is close to its target, the aggregate volume of primary credit is expected to be low. In other words, a low average level of discount window borrowing does not necessarily mean that there is a reluctance to borrow; instead, it could simply reflect a situation in which depository institutions do not currently need to borrow. In addition, when there is an abundance of liquidity in the banking system, as is the case in the current ample-reserves monetary policy regime, depository institutions may have less need to obtain additional liquidity via the discount window. Again, this does not necessarily mean that there is a reluctance to borrow. Conversely, the presence of discount window borrowing does not necessarily reflect the absence of a reluctance to borrow. It could be the case that, although aggregate usage increases, there are still some depository institutions that are willing to pay well above the primary credit rate even when they could have borrowed readily from the discount window. For these reasons, it is important that we complement data with market outreach information to assess the effectiveness of the discount window. Changes and Challenges since the Introduction of Primary and Secondary CreditPrimary and secondary credit exist today, but some changes have been made to primary credit since its inception. For example, although the discount window was used extensively and played an important role in the emergency measures taken during the financial crisis of 2007–09, some depository institutions during this period still were willing to borrow funds from the market at rates above the discount rate.9This suggested that there was a reluctance to borrow before the crisis, and that reluctance appeared to grow over the course of the crisis. To promote the restoration of orderly conditions in financial markets and provide depository institutions with greater assurance about the cost and availability of funding, the Board approved temporary changes to its primary credit discount window facility during the crisis.10In addition, in late 2007, the Board established the Term Auction Facility (TAF).11 Concerns about lending to troubled depository institutions reemerged after the 2007–09 financial crisis. In the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which was enacted in 2010, Congress required the Fed to publish detailed individual institution borrowing data with a two-year lag.12This action was intended to enhance the transparency and accountability of Federal Reserve lending while still preserving a measure of confidentiality to avoid discouraging depository institutions from borrowing. More recently, in March 2020, the Fed announced changes to the provision of primary credit that were intended to encourage depository institutions to use the discount window to meet demands for credit from households and businesses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. These changes included setting the primary credit rate at a level equal to the top of the federal funds target range—a step that enhanced the ability of the discount window to support trading within the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) target range for the federal funds rate—and communicating the terms of borrowing as 90 days, prepayable and renewable on a daily basis. To further encourage depository institutions to use the discount window, the Fed also made changes to its reporting of Reserve Bank–level aggregate weekly discount window borrowing. It consolidated amounts previously reported as "loans," which include discount window borrowing, into a broader category of assets.13The changes made in 2020 remain in effect. During and after the spring 2023 stress events, the discount window again played an important role in supporting both monetary policy and financial stability. Depository institutions that came under severe stress turned to the discount window. The discount window also served an important role in providing ready access to funding, especially for depository institutions experiencing spillovers from the bank failures. To further ensure that depository institutions had the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors, the Board announced the creation of a new emergency program, the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP). Although the BTFP was established pursuant to the Board's emergency lending authority in section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, the BTFP used the discount window infrastructure to lend to eligible depository institution borrowers.14By relying on the existing discount window infrastructure, the BTFP was able to begin operating right away. The program ceased extending new loans on March 11, 2024, as scheduled. Today the discount window continues to be an effective tool, but it is important to acknowledge that economic and banking conditions continue to evolve. Since the 2003 discount window reassessment, we have seen an increased focus on liquidity in banking regulation, including the advent of quantitative liquidity requirements for large banking organizations; technological changes in the banking system; a general trend toward faster and 24-7-365 payment systems; changes in the composition and posture of Federal Home Loan Bank lending; and the move to an ample-reserves monetary policy implementation regime. In light of these developments, the Federal Reserve System has taken important steps to ensure that the discount window performs its functions successfully in the 21st-century economy. For example, last year the Board, along with the other federal banking agencies and the National Credit Union Administration, issued guidance on contingency funding plans that encouraged depository institutions to be ready to borrow from the discount window.15This includes taking steps to establish borrowing relationships with the Federal Reserve, such as providing certain legal documentation and ensuring that collateral to secure loans is ready to pledge. In connection with interagency initiatives, Reserve Banks have conducted outreach to depository institutions and made efforts to guide them in using the discount window. Data suggest that this encouragement is working. By the end of 2023, 3,900 banks, or roughly 80 percent of all banks, had completed the legal documentation required to borrow from the discount window.16Of those, nearly 2,000 banks had pledged collateral, with an aggregate lendable value of over $2.6 trillion after applying appropriate discounts. These figures are notably above their levels at the end of 2021 and 2022. Although I am pleased to see the improvements in discount window readiness statistics, continued outreach is still important. To that effect, this summer, Federal Reserve Banks hosted an Ask the Fed® session to discuss the purpose of the discount window, its facilities, and recommendations for depository institutions on how to prepare to borrow from the Fed.17 Additionally, the Federal Reserve System has made important investments to enhance the technology that supports discount window activities. Earlier this year, the System launched Discount Window Direct, which is an online portal for depository institutions to request and prepay loans as well as securely message their local Reserve Bank.18Discount Window Direct generally is accessible 24 hours a day. We are actively encouraging the use of Discount Window Direct. Seeking Feedback on the Discount WindowTo complement our efforts to enhance discount window operations, the Federal Reserve Board recently announced that it is collecting feedback from the public on operational frictions associated with the discount window and intraday credit through the issuance of a request for information. As some of you may know, a request for information is a formal document through which a government agency solicits feedback. Members of the public can submit comments in response to the request for information until December 9, 2024.19 The Board requests input on various discount window and intraday credit operational practices, such as the process for requesting, receiving, and repaying discount window loans as well as Reserve Bank discount window and intraday credit communications practices. Through the request for information, the Board hopes to gain further insight into the operational aspects that are the most costly or burdensome for depository institutions. This will help the Fed consider further improvements to promote efficiency and reduce burden on depository institutions. Ultimately, the Fed's goal is to build on the current discount window operations and processes so that the discount window will continue to provide ready access to funding against a wide range of collateral in the future. I encourage members of the public to submit comments on the request for information, and I look forward to considering the feedback that we receive. Economic OutlookBefore concluding, let me share with you a summary of my outlook for the U.S. economy, as I did yesterday with the audience at Davidson. Economic activity continues to grow at a solid pace. Inflation has eased substantially. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state. Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, well down from 6.5 percent two years earlier. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent, compared with 5.2 percent two years earlier. Our restrictive monetary policy stance played a role in restraining demand and in keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of inflation surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Inflation is now much closer to the FOMC's 2 percent objective. I expect that we will continue to make progress toward that goal. While, overall, the economy continues to grow at a solid pace, the labor market has modestly cooled. Employers added an average of 186,000 jobs per month during July through September, a slower pace than seen early this year. The unemployment rate now stands at 4.1 percent, up from 3.8 percent in September 2023. Meanwhile, job openings declined by about 4 million since their peak in March 2022. The good news is that the rise in unemployment has been limited and gradual, and the level of unemployment remains historically low. Even so, the cooling in the labor market is noticeable. Congress mandated the Fed to pursue maximum employment and price stability. The balance of risks to our two mandates has changed—as risks to inflation have diminished and risks to employment have risen, these risks have been brought roughly into balance. The FOMC has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal. To maintain the strength of the labor market, my FOMC colleagues and I recalibrated our policy stance last month, lowering our policy interest rate by 1/2 percentage point. Looking ahead, I will carefully watch incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks when considering additional adjustments to the federal funds target range, our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy. My approach to monetary policymaking is to make decisions meeting by meeting. As the economy evolves, I will continue to update my thinking about policy to best promote maximum employment and price stability. Thank you. ReferencesArtuç, Erhan, and Selva Demiralp (2010). "Provision of Liquidity through the Primary Credit Facility during the Financial Crisis: A Structural Analysis," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,Economic Policy Review,vol. 16 (August), p. 43–53. Bernanke, Ben S. (2009a). "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2009 Credit Markets Symposium, Charlotte, N.C., April 3. ——— (2009b). "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet: An Update," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Board Conference on Key Developments in Monetary Policy, Washington, October 8. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2002a). "Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks; Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions," final rule, technical amendment (Docket Nos. R-1123 and R-1134),Federal Register,vol. 67 (November 7), pp. 67777–87. ——— (2002b). "Publication of Final Rule Amending Regulation A (Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks)," press release, October 31. ——— (2020). "Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses," press release, March 15. ——— (2023). "Federal Reserve Board Announces It Will Make Available Additional Funding to Eligible Depository Institutions to Help Assure Banks Have the Ability to Meet the Needs of All Their Depositors," press release, March 12. ——— (2024a). "Bank Term Funding Program: Frequently Asked Questions (PDF)," updated January 24. ——— (2024b). "Request for Information and Comment on Operational Aspects of Federal Reserve Bank Extensions of Discount Window and Intraday Credit," request for information and comment (Docket No. OP-1838),Federal Register,vol. 89 (September 10), pp. 73415–18. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2023). "Agencies Update Guidance on Liquidity Risks and Contingency Planning," joint press release, July 28. Clouse, James A. (1994). "Recent Developments in Discount Window Policy (PDF),"Federal Reserve Bulletin,vol. 80 (November), pp. 965–77. Jefferson, Philip N. (2024). "A History of the Fed's Discount Window: 1913-2000," speech delivered at Davidson College, Davidson, N.C., October 8. Madigan, Brian F. (2009). "Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Jefferson (2024).Return to text 3. For more details about this period, see Clouse (1994). In response to the wave of depository institution failures, Congress placed legal limitations on Federal Reserve lending to troubled institutions. Specifically, section 142 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) amended section 10B of the Federal Reserve Act to place restraints on discount window lending to undercapitalized and critically undercapitalized insured depository institutions. FDICIA also imposed liability on the Board of Governors for excess losses incurred by the FDIC that are attributable to lending beyond those limits. The provisions of FDICIA were intended to reduce moral hazard in the banking system and limit taxpayer losses.Return to text 4. For more details, see the October 31, 2002, Federal Reserve press release (Board of Governors, 2002b) and the final rule implementing the changes (Board of Governors, 2002a).Return to text 5. In 2003, when primary credit was implemented, there was a single federal funds target rate. The Federal Open Market Committee adopted a federal funds target range on December 16, 2008.Return to text 6. For details on the change to the rate spread announced in March 2020, see the press release (Board of Governors, 2020). As will be discussed in greater detail later, before 2020, the spread between the primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate (or top of the target range) had changed a few times to address economic conditions during the 2007–09 financial crisis and the subsequent recovery.Return to text 7. This design feature also would help Reserve Banks manage risk more easily by establishing a standardized approach and risk controls when lending through a facility reserved for troubled depository institutions. Loans to troubled depository institutions entail more risk to the lending Reserve Bank, and depository institutions that are undercapitalized or critically undercapitalized are subject to lending limitations under FDICIA.Return to text 8. See Artuç and Demiralp (2010).Return to text 9. See Bernanke (2009a) and Madigan (2009) for a retrospective that elaborates on some of the emergency measures taken during the 2007–09 financial crisis and the reasoning for discount window rate changes during the financial crisis.Return to text 10. Throughout this crisis, the Board approved numerous reductions in the primary credit rate and narrowed the spread between the primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate twice. With the narrowing of the spread in August 2007 from 100 basis points to 50 basis points and in March 2008 to 25 basis points, the Board announced that the maximum term for primary credit loans would be extended, first to 30 days and then to 90 days, respectively. As economic conditions improved, in 2010, the Board increased the spread between the primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate to 50 basis points and shortened the maximum term for primary credit loans to overnight.Return to text 11. The TAF provided fixed quantities of term credit to depository institutions through an auction mechanism and seemed to have largely addressed banks' concern that borrowing from the Federal Reserve would imply weakness. According to Bernanke (2009b, paragraph 7), this was "partly because the sizable number of borrowers provides a greater assurance of anonymity, and possibly also because the three-day period between the auction and auction settlement suggests that the facility's users are not using it to meet acute funding needs on a particular day."Return to text 12. See section 1103 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which amended section 11 of the Federal Reserve Act.Return to text 13. The Board's H.4.1 statistical release, "Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks," is published weekly. It presents a balance sheet for each Federal Reserve Bank, a consolidated balance sheet for all 12 Reserve Banks, an associated statement that lists the factors affecting reserve balances of depository institutions, and several other tables presenting information on the assets, liabilities, and commitments of the Federal Reserve Banks. For additional details on the consolidation of "loans" into a broader category of assets, see the March 19, 2020, H.4.1 announcement, available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41/20200319.Return to text 14. As with the discount window, an eligible institution participated in the BTFP through its local Reserve Bank. The legal agreements and process for pledging securities in the BTFP also relied on those used in discount window lending. Nevertheless, the BTFP differed from the discount window in various ways, including the term of lending, scope of eligible collateral, collateral valuation, and interest rate. For more information on the differences between the BTFP and the discount window, see the response to question A.3 in Board of Governors (2024a, p. 3). For additional details on the BTFP, see the March 12, 2023, press release (Board of Governors, 2023).Return to text 15. See Board of Governors and others (2023).Return to text 16. The statistics in this paragraph are available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/discount-window-readiness.htm.Return to text 17. More information on Ask the Fed is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website athttps://bsr.stlouisfed.org/askthefed/Auth/Logon.Return to text 18. Additional details on Discount Window Direct can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank Services website athttps://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/lending-central.Return to text 19. See the information on discount window operations in section II.A of Board of Governors (2024b).Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the Conference on Monetary Policy 2024: Bridging Science and Practice, European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany Thank you, Isabel, and thank you for the opportunity to speak here at the ECB today.1I am particularly pleased to be part of this year's conference because the theme you have chosen has, for some time now, also been a theme of my career as an academic and public servant. Every day, of course, central bankers must bridge science and practice, drawing on the insights that research provides, specifically, because the economy and the world are continuously subject to new circumstances. We must do so, and put those insights into practice, because everyone in the United States, and in Europe, and around the world, depends on a healthy and growing economy, and depends on policymakers making the right decisions to help keep it that way. But well before I came to the Federal Reserve, I was also bridging science and practice. First, as a labor economist, when, for example, I was exploring how employment, productivity, and earnings are influenced not only by educational attainment and experience, but also by policies. Later, as chief economist at the Department of Labor, I brought science to bear in carrying out its mission of supporting workers. As the U.S. representative at the World Bank, economic science was likewise crucial in deciding how to best direct the institution's resources to where they were needed the most. In each of these roles, I have learned a bit more about the need to balance rigorous scientific understanding of the problems that people face with the real-world experiences of those people, which sometimes do not fit so neatly into an economic theorem or principle. Most recently, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have been focused on the very practical task of reducing inflation while keeping employment at its maximum level. To understand the recent experience of high inflation in the United States, it is helpful to consider how inflation behaved around the world after the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss the global dimensions of the recent bout of high inflation in different economies, both comparing similarities and contrasting differences, with a special emphasis on the factors that enabled the United States to achieve disinflation while having stronger economic activity relative to its peers. I will then conclude with some comments on the U.S. economic outlook and the implications for monetary policy. Starting with the similarities in our inflationary experiences, in early 2020, a worldwide pandemic disrupted the global economy and ultimately caused a surge of inflation around the world. Global goods production was hobbled, transportation and other aspects of supply chains became entangled, and there were significant labor shortages, all combining to cause a severe imbalance between supply and demand in much of the world. Sharp increases in commodity prices were exacerbated by Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The result was a global escalation of inflation. As you can see by the black line onslide 2, a measure of world headline inflation in 26 economies accounting for 60 percent of global gross domestic product (GDP) rose to a degree that had not been experienced since the early 1980s. This worldwide increase of inflation was synchronized and widespread across advanced and emerging economies. To measure the synchronization and breadth of this inflationary period, Federal Reserve Board researchers have employed a dynamic factor model to estimate a common component of inflation across these 26 economies.2As you can see by the blue line on slide 2, the estimated global component accounts for a large share of the variation of headline inflation among these economies after inflation began rising sharply in 2021. This evidence is consistent with the familiar story of widespread lockdowns, shutdowns of manufacturing plants in different parts of the world, disrupted logistic networks, increases in shipping costs, and longer delivery times. In the recovery, we also saw globally higher demand for commodities, intermediate inputs, and final goods and services, with demand exceeding a still-constrained supply. Indeed, one important contributor to the recent co-movement in inflation across the world has been food and energy prices. As you know, most of the time variations in inflation are heavily influenced by food and energy prices, which tend to be more volatile than the prices for other goods and services. Because many food and energy commodities are traded internationally, retail prices paid by consumers also tend to have some degree of global synchronization. Thus, as you would expect, the black line in the left chart onslide 3shows that food and energy inflation faced by consumers around the world—here called noncore inflation—rose substantially in the recent inflationary episode. Moreover, world noncore inflation is largely accounted for by its global component in yellow, thus also showing a high degree of global synchronization. Another thing we can say about the recent worldwide escalation of inflation is how widely diffused it was across different price categories. Core inflation excludes food and energy prices, and it includes many categories more exposed to domestic conditions such as housing and medical services. Yet, as shown by the black and red lines in the right chart on slide 3, the recent rise in core inflation showed a high degree of global synchronization, with the global component accounting for a large share of the post-pandemic inflation. Looking back in history, this is the first time since the 1970s that we saw a rise in core inflation so widespread across such a large number of countries. Moreover, underlying this rise in core inflation in the United States and other advanced economies, research carried out by Federal Reserve Board economists shows that there was a widespread rise in prices across the whole range of categories within the core basket.3 Academics and policymakers have debated about the possible reasons explaining the recent co-movement of inflation around the world. The COVID-19 pandemic was a global phenomenon and had effects on supply and demand that were similar in many countries. On the supply side, businesses closed, affecting goods production and the provision of services. There were labor shortages due to illness, social distancing, early retirements, and declines in immigration, with all of these factors making it harder to produce goods and services.4Production disruptions and labor shortages propagated around the world due to long and intricate supply chains forged over several decades of growing globalization in trade. The imbalance between supply and demand widened as consumers switched their spending from services to goods, straining transportation capacity that further disrupted supply chains.5This re-allocation of demand from services to goods also strained the ability of firms to produce, as they struggled to find qualified workers due to the needed re-allocation of workers across sectors.6This demand was also likely fueled by the fiscal response to COVID-19 in 2020 and 2021. All of these factors drove up costs, and there were others. Russia's war on Ukraine intensified the increases in energy and food commodity prices during the recovery from the pandemic. And the interaction of these different forces also likely played a role.7For example, as Asia increased production to meet higher demand for goods in the U.S., this may have driven up wages and other input costs in Asia, increasing demand for imports from other places and, in turn, raising costs there, and so on. My assessment is that both supply and demand contributed to the recent global inflationary episode, including in the United States, with international trade of goods, including commodities, and services playing an important role in disseminating these forces around the world. One salient aspect of past inflationary episodes is the observation that core inflation typically falls more slowly than it increases. As we can see by the red lines onslide 4, world core inflation rose more quickly than it decreased in the three most recent episodes of significant inflation and disinflation—from a trough in 1972 to a new trough in 1978; from 1978 to a trough in 1986; and then the recent episode, from the end of 2020 through the first quarter of 2024. In these episodes, the escalation of four-quarter core inflation increased by an average of 7/10 percentage point per quarter to its peak, while it decreased by an average of only 3/10 percentage point per quarter to the trough.8 Still, it is important that central bankers not only compare similarities across economies in the recent inflation fight, but also contrast the differences. Notably, another important feature of the last three inflation and disinflation periods is that though the share of core inflation explained by the common component increases when inflation rises, this share decreases when inflation falls, as can be seen by the black shaded areas of the three panels on slide 4. This suggests that while the reasons underlying the co-movement of inflation across the world—such as global supply disruptions and commodity price shocks—may have been important when prices were increasing, they have been less important when prices have decreased. This evidence indicates that factors that vary from economy to economy become more relevant in the disinflationary period. Economic researchers have raised several possible explanations for the different inflation trajectories experienced by different economies during this post-pandemic period. For example, some point to differences in the magnitudes of the demand and supply imbalances driven by the shutdown and reopening of each economy, with this imbalance possibly playing a larger role on inflation in the euro area relative to the United States.9While noting that differences in the size of fiscal stimulus in different countries were likely important, the targeting of that stimulus also differed, in some cases with a greater emphasis on addressing supply disruptions.10Global factors also affect various economies differently, with studies showing that the exposures to fluctuations in commodity prices are an important issue.11For instance, Europe was heavily affected by natural gas shortages related to Russia's war on Ukraine, while gas supplies in the United States were more plentiful during this period. Also, supply chains were untangled at different speeds in different parts of the world, with, for instance, low water levels in the Panama Canal and attacks in the Red Sea by Houthi rebels affecting different shipping routes differently around the world. And, last but not least, differences in labor market tightness very likely played a role, with evidence pointing to its importance in the United States in driving up nominal wage growth, a factor that likely helped keep employment and economic activity at healthy levels.12 Researchers at the Board of Governors also find that differences in the pace of disinflation across countries have been largely driven by different trajectories of services price inflation.13As shown onslide 5, they find that the dispersion of inflation across countries peaked in 2023 and has been declining since then for headline and core goods, but not so much for core services inflation, with housing developments helping to account for the differences in services inflation. Other cross-country research suggests that wage developments help explain services inflation dynamics.14Indeed, services inflation from both the United States and the euro area have been elevated. Still, while U.S. housing services inflation has been running higher than the wage-driven nonhousing component, the reverse is true in the euro area. While the cross-country differences during the recent bout of high inflation have emerged more prominently during the disinflationary period, economic growth has been very heterogenous since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Generally speaking, the U.S. has experienced a significantly stronger recovery than other advanced economies. As we can see in the left panel onslide 6, real GDP has grown substantially more in the United States since 2021. This is also the case with respect to the larger components of GDP, such as consumption and investment, shown in the right two panels. In explaining why the U.S. has managed to bring down inflation and experience strong economic activity, I believe that the combination of restrictive monetary policy together with convex supply curves can help explain these developments.15In addition, there are three supply-related factors that have also made significant contributions to the combination of rapid disinflation together with continued and resilient growth. First, there are important factors that have affected total factor productivity differently across countries. For instance, the U.S. has seen greater business dynamism, as reflected in a higher rate of new business formation, shown in the left panel onslide 7. This is important because while most new firms fail, a small share of those that survive grow rapidly and make significant contributions to aggregate productivity.16Moreover, the pandemic-era business creation surge has been particularly strong in high-tech sectors, such as computer systems design as well as research and development services.17In fact, we have also seen greater growth in total factor productivity in the U.S. relative to other advanced economies, as shown in the right figure on slide 7. In addition, while the artificial intelligence (AI) technology is still in its nascency, U.S. businesses across different sectors of the economy are investing in and adopting AI. According to the Business Trends and Outlook Survey of the Census, more than 20 percent of companies in 15 sectors have adopted AI.18It may be too early to tell, but additional productivity gains may be coming from tasks that are enhanced by AI through process improvements.19 Second, we have seen a stronger rate of labor productivity growth in the United States as shown in the left panel onslide 8.20The economic policy response to the pandemic in the U.S. was robust, but it was different from the response in many other advanced economies. In other economies, the emphasis was on maintaining employment, and specifically keeping workers employed in their existing firms when the pandemic arrived. This was the case, for example, in the euro area, and the middle panel indeed shows that the unemployment rate peaked several times higher in the United States. This approach minimized euro-area job losses, but it may have limited the flow of workers to more-productive sectors of the economy, which is supported by Federal Reserve Board research showing substantially more sectoral re-allocation of workers in the United States compared to the euro area, as seen in the right figure on slide 8.21 Third, the U.S. labor supply has grown in the post-pandemic period. The labor force participation rate increased solidly, especially from the beginning of 2021 through the middle of 2023, and the U.S. population increased strongly because of high levels of immigration. While recent immigration flows into some European countries have been comparable in proportion to those into the U.S., as seen in the left figure onslide 9, new immigrants may have contributed relatively more to U.S. growth because they often integrate more quickly into the labor force, as seen in the right figure.22 Finally, and turning our focus to monetary policy, this stronger economic performance, with falling inflation, has allowed the FOMC to be patient about the timing in reducing our policy rate. This performance gave us time to strongly focus on the inflation side of our mandate. And this, together with the bump in inflation early this year, helps explain why we began to ease monetary policy to less-restrictive levels only after other central banks of advanced economies had done so. But now, the combination of significant ongoing progress in reducing inflation and a cooling in the labor market means that the time has come to begin easing monetary policy, and I strongly supported the decision by the FOMC in our September meeting to cut the federal funds rate by 50 basis points. Looking ahead, while I believe the focus should remain on continuing to bring inflation to 2 percent, I support shifting attention to the maximum-employment side of the FOMC's dual mandate as well. The labor market remains resilient, but I support a balanced approach to the FOMC's dual mandate so we can continue making progress on inflation while avoiding an undesirable slowdown in employment growth and economic expansion. If progress on inflation continues as I expect, I will support additional cuts in the federal funds rate to move toward a more neutral policy stance over time. Still, my approach to any policy decision will continue to be data dependent and to rely on multiple and diverse sources of data to form my view of how the economy is evolving. For instance, I am closely monitoring the economic effects from Hurricane Helene and from geopolitical events in the Middle East, since these could affect the U.S. economic outlook. If downside risks to employment escalate, it may be appropriate to move policy more quickly to a neutral stance. Alternatively, if incoming data do not provide confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent, it may be appropriate to slow normalization in the policy rate. As I have described, the escalation of inflation unleashed by the pandemic was global in scope, and the fight to reduce inflation has also been global. Each of our economies faces its own unique mixture of challenges, but by comparing our similarities and contrasting our differences, I believe we can learn from each other's experiences. In conclusion, let me thank those of you in this room who contribute to bridging science and practice. For those working on the policy side, thank you for the hard work you do each day to analyze the economic data that allows not only policymakers like me, but also consumers and businesses to gain a better understanding of ongoing developments in the global economy. On the academic side, thank you for your creativity and ingenuity in asking policy-relevant questions and pushing the boundaries of our understanding of an ever-changing economic landscape. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia, Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Michele Modugno (2024), "Lessons from the Co-Movement of Inflation around the World," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 28).Return to text 3. I refer to updated estimates from the following works: Hie Joo Ahn and Matteo Luciani (2020), "Common and Idiosyncratic Inflation," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-024 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March; revised August 2024); and Eli Nir, Flora Haberkorn, and Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia (2021), "International Measures of Common Inflation," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 5).Return to text 4. See Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia, Musa Orak, and Zina Saijid (2023), "Drivers of Post-Pandemic Inflation in Selected Advanced Economies and Implications for the Outlook," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 13).Return to text 5. See Gianluca Benigno, Julian di Giovanni, Jan J.J. Groen, and Adam I. Noble (2022), "The GSCPI: A New Barometer of Global Supply Chain Pressures," Staff Reports 1017 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May).Return to text 6. See Francesco Ferrante, Sebastian Graves, and Matteo Iacoviello (2023), "The Inflationary Effects of Sectoral Reallocation,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 140, supplement (November), pp. S64–S81.Return to text 7. See Paul Ho, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Felipe Schwartzman (2022), "Multilateral Comovement in a New Keynesian World: A Little Trade Goes a Long Way (PDF)," Working Paper Series 22-10 (Richmond: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, November).Return to text 8. For the 1972–78 period, we define the inflation ascent path as 1972:Q3 to 1974:Q4, while its descent path is 1975:Q1 to 1978:Q2. For the 1978–86 period, we define the inflation ascent path as 1978:Q3 to 1980:Q2, while its descent path is 1980:Q3 to 1986:Q2. For the 2020–24 period, we define the inflation ascent path as 2021:Q1 to 2022:Q4, while its descent path is 2023:Q1 to 2024:Q1 because it is the latest available data.Return to text 9. See Domenico Giannone and Giorgio Primiceri (2024), "The Drivers of Post-Pandemic Inflation," NBER Working Paper Series 32859 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).Return to text 10. For the economic effects on the size of fiscal stimuli, see Oscar Jorda and Fernanda Nechio (2023), "Inflation and Wage Growth since the Pandemic,"European Economic Review,vol. 156, 104474.Return to text 11. See Christiane Baumeister, Gert Peersman, and Ine Van Robays (2010), "The Economic Consequences of Oil Shocks: Differences across Countries and Time (PDF)," in Renee Fry, Callum Jones, and Christopher Kent, eds.,Inflation in an Era of Relative Price Shocks(Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia), pp. 91–128; and Andrea De Michelis, Thiago Ferreira, and Matteo Iacoviello (2020), "Oil Prices and Consumption across Countries and U.S. States,"International Journal of Central Banking,vol. 16 (March), pp. 3–43.Return to text 12. For the effects of labor market tightness on price and wage inflation, see Olivier J. Blanchard and Ben S. Bernanke (2022), "What Caused the U.S. Pandemic-Era Inflation?" NBER Working Paper Series 31417 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June);Olivier J. Blanchard and Ben S. Bernanke (2024), "An Analysis of Pandemic-Era Inflation in 11 Economies," NBER Working Paper Series 32532 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).Return to text 13. See Maria Aristizabal-Ramirez, Dylan Moore, and Eva Van Leemput (forthcoming), "What Goes Up Together Must Not Come Down Together: An Analysis of Services Disinflation," Forthcoming as an International Finance Discussion Paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).Return to text 14. See Pongpitch Amatyakul, Deniz Igan, and Marco Jacopo Lombardi (2024), "Sectoral Price Dynamics in the Last Mile of Post-COVID-19 Disinflation,"BIS Quarterly Review,March, pp. 45–57.Return to text 15. See Adriana D. Kugler (2024), "Disinflation without a Rise in Unemployment? What Is Different This Time Around," speech delivered at the 2024 Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Economic Summit, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., March 1.Return to text 16. See Titan Alon, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley (2018), "Older and Slower: The Startup Deficit's Lasting Effects on Aggregate Productivity Growth,"Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 93 (January), pp. 68–85; and Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), "The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3–24.Return to text 17. See Ryan Decker and John Haltiwanger (2024), "High Tech Business Entry in the Pandemic Era," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 19).Return to text 18. In data released September 23, 2024, the share of firms reporting the use of AI to perform tasks previously done by employees in producing goods or services was 27 percent.Return to text 19. See Lisa D. Cook (2024), "Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, and the Path Ahead for Productivity," speech delivered at "Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications of AI, Big Data, and Remote Work," a conference organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Richmond, Atlanta, October 1.Return to text 20. See Francois de Soyres, Joaquin Garcia-Cabo Herrero, Nils Goernemann, Sharon Jeon, Grace Lofstrom, and Dylan Moore (2024), "Why Is the U.S. GDP Recovering Faster than Other Advanced Economies?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 17).Return to text 21. See Joaquin García-Cabo, Anna Lipińska, and Gaston Navarro (2023), "Sectoral Shocks, Reallocation, and Labor Market Policies,"European Economic Review,vol. 156 (July), 104494.Return to text 22. See Courtney Brell, Christian Dustmann, and Ian Preston (2020), "The Labor Market Integration of Refugee Migrants in High-Income Countries,"Journal of Economic Perspectives,vol. 34 (Winter), pp. 94–121.Return to text Accessible Version
Governor Christopher J. Waller At “A 50 Year Retrospective on the Shadow Open Market Committee and Its Role in Monetary Policy,” a conference sponsored by the Hoover Institution, Stanford University, Stanford, California Thank you, Athanasios, and thank you for the opportunity to be part of this very worthy celebration.1In support of the theme of this conference, I do have some thoughts on the Shadow Open Market Committee's contributions to the policy debate, in particular its advocacy for policy rules. But before I get to that, I am going to exercise the keynote speaker's freedom to talk about whatever I want. To that end, I want to take a few minutes to offer my views on the economic outlook and its implications for monetary policy. So let me start there, and afterward I will discuss the role that policy rules play in my decision making and in the deliberations of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). In the three weeks or so since the most recent FOMC meeting, data we have received has been uneven, as it sometimes has been over the past year. I continue to judge that the U.S. economy is on a solid footing, with employment near the FOMC's maximum employment objective and inflation in the vicinity of our target, even though the latest inflation data was disappointing. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at a 2.2 percent annual rate in the first half of 2024, and I expect it to grow a bit faster in the third quarter. The Blue Chip consensus of private sector forecasters predicts 2.3 percent, while the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow model, based on up-to-the moment data, is predicting real growth of 3.2 percent. Earlier, there were concerns that GDP in the first half of this year was overstating the strength of the economy, since gross domestic income (GDI) was estimated to have grown a mere 1.3 percent in the first half of this year, suggesting a big downward revision to GDP was coming. But revisions received after our most recent FOMC meeting showed the opposite—GDI growth was revised up substantially to 3.2 percent. This change in turn led to an upward revision in the personal saving rate of about 2 percentage points in the second quarter, leaving it at 5.2 percent in June. This revision suggests that household resources for future consumption are actually in good shape, although data and anecdotal evidence suggests lower-income groups are struggling. These revisions suggest that the economy is much stronger than previously thought, with little indication of a major slowdown in economic activity. That outlook is supported by consumer spending that has been and continues to be strong. Though the growth in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) has moderated since the second half of 2023, it has continued at an average pace of close to 2.5 percent so far this year. Also, my business contacts believe that there is considerable pent-up demand for durable goods, home improvements, and other big-ticket items, demand that built up due to high interest rates for credit cards and home equity loans. Now that rates have started to come down and are expected to come down more, consumers will be eager to make those purchases. For business spending, purchasing managers for manufacturers describe ongoing weakness in that sector, but those for the large majority of businesses outside of manufacturing continue to report a solid expansion of activity. Now let's talk about the labor market. Only a couple months ago, it appeared that the labor market was cooling too quickly. Low numbers for job creation and a jump in the unemployment rate from 4.1 percent in June to 4.3 percent in July raised risks that the labor market was deteriorating. To remind you of how bad the markets viewed the July data, some Fed watchers were calling for an emergency FOMC meeting to discuss a rate cut. While the unemployment rate ticked down in August, job growth was once again well below expectations. Many were arguing that the labor market was on the verge of a serious deterioration and that the Fed was behind the curve even after a 50 basis point cut in the policy rate at the September FOMC meeting. Then we got the September employment report. Job creation in September was unexpectedly strong at 254,000 and the unemployment rate fell back down to 4.1 percent, which is where it was in June. The report also showed big upward revisions to payroll gains for the previous two months. Together, the message was loud and clear: While job creation has moderated and the unemployment rate has risen over the past year, the labor market remains quite healthy. Along with other new data on the labor market, the evidence is that labor supply and demand have come into balance. The number of job vacancies, a sign of strength in the labor market, has fallen gradually since the beginning of the year. The ratio of vacancies to unemployed is at 1.2, about the level in 2019, which was a pretty strong labor market. To put this number into perspective, recent research has shown that this ratio has been above 1 only three times since 1960.2The quits rate, another sign of labor market strength, has fallen lower than it was in 2019, a decrease which partly reflects that the hiring rate has fallen as labor supply and demand have come into better balance. In sum, based on payrolls, the unemployment rate and job revisions, there has been a very gradual moderation in labor demand relative to supply, but not a deterioration. The stability of the labor market, as reflected in these two measures as well as the other metrics I mentioned, bolsters my confidence that we can achieve further progress toward the FOMC's inflation goal while supporting a healthy labor market that adds jobs and boosts wages and living standards for workers. I will be looking for more evidence to support this outlook in the weeks and months to come. But, unfortunately, it won't be easy to interpret the October jobs report to be released just before the next FOMC meeting. This report will most likely show a significant but temporary loss of jobs from the two recent hurricanes and the strike at Boeing. I expect these factors may reduce employment growth by more than 100,000 this month, and there may be a small effect on the unemployment rate, but I'm not sure it will be that visible. Since the jobs report will come during the usual blackout period for policymakers commenting on the economy, you won't have any of us trying to put this low reading into perspective, though I hope others will. Looking ahead, I expect payroll gains to moderate from their current pace but continue at a solid rate. The unemployment rate may drift a bit higher but is likely to remain quite low in historical terms. While I believe the labor market is on a solid footing, I will continue to watch the full range of data for signs of weakness. Meanwhile, inflation, after showing considerable progress for several months toward the FOMC's 2 percent target, likely moved up in September. The consumer price index grew 0.2 percent over the past month, 2.1 percent over the past three months, 1.6 percent over six months and 2.4 percent in the past year. Oil prices fell over most of the summer but then more recently have surged. Excluding energy and also food prices that likewise tend to be volatile, and just as it did in August, core CPI inflation printed at 0.3 percent in September and 3.3 percent over the past year. Private-sector forecasts are predicting that PCE inflation, the FOMC's preferred measure, will also move up in September. Core PCE prices are expected to have risen around 0.25 percent last month. While not a welcome development, if the monthly core PCE inflation number comes in around this level, over the last 5 months it is still running very close to 2 percent on an annualized basis. We have made a lot of progress on inflation over the course of the last year and half, but that progress has clearly been uneven—at times it feels like being on a rollercoaster. Whether or not this month's inflation reading is just noise or if it signals ongoing increases, is yet to be seen. I will be watching the data carefully to see how persistent this recent uptick is. The FOMC's inflation goal is an average of 2 percent over the longer run and there are some good reasons to think that price increases will be modest going forward. I am hearing reports from firms that their pricing power seems to have waned as consumers have become more sensitive to price changes. There has also been a steady slowing in the growth of labor compensation. It is true that average hourly earnings growth in September ticked up to 4 percent over the past year. And though it might seem like wage increases of 4 percent a year would put upward pressure on inflation that is near 2 percent, that might not be true if one considers productivity, which has grown at an average annual rate of 2.9 percent for the past five quarters. Some of this strength was making up for productivity that shrank due to the pandemic, but the longer it continues—up 2.5 percent for the second quarter—the better productivity supports wage growth of 4 percent, or even higher, without driving up inflation. All that said, I will be watching all the data related to inflation closely. With the labor market in rough balance, employment near its maximum level, and inflation generally running close to our target over the past several months, I want to do what I can as a policymaker to keep the economy on this path. For me, the central question is how much and how fast to reduce the target for the federal funds rate, which I believe is currently set at a restrictive level. To help answer questions like this, I often look at various monetary policy rules to assess the appropriate setting of policy. Policy rules have long been of serious interest to the Shadow Open Market Committee. So before I turn to my views on the future path of policy, I thought I would talk about monetary policy rules versus discretion and begin with some background about the use of rules at the FOMC. For a brief overview of the history of the advent of rules at the Board, I have been directed to the second chapter ofThe Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policywritten by George Kahn, and I have also consulted the memories of longtime members of the Board staff.3Rules came along in the 1990s as the Fed was moving away from monetary targeting, focusing more on interest-rate policy, and taking its first major steps toward increased transparency. There was immediate interest in Taylor-type rules among Fed staff, and even some contributions of research.4There was a presentation to the FOMC on rules in 1995, and that was the same year that John Taylor's Bay Area colleague, Janet Yellen, was apparently the first policymaker to mention the Taylor rule at an FOMC meeting. While FOMC decisions mimicked a Taylor rule much of the time under Chairman Alan Greenspan, he was famously an advocate of "constructive ambiguity" in communication, and he and other central bankers since have resisted the suggestion that decisions could be handed over to strict rules. Today, of course, a number of rules-based analyses are included in the material submitted to policymakers ahead of every FOMC meeting, and we publish the policy prescriptions of different rules as part of the Board's semi-annualMonetary Policy Report. Rules have become part of the furniture in modern policymaking. As everyone here knows, but for the benefit of other listeners, Taylor rules relate the level of the policy interest rate to a limited number of other economic variables, most often including the deviation of inflation from a target value and a measure of resource use in the economy relative to some long-run trend.5There are numerous forms of the Taylor rule, but they generally fall into two categories. The first of these, an inertial rule, has the property that the policy rate changes only slowly over time. I tend to think of it as an approach that captures the reaction function of a policymaker in a stable economy where the forces that would tend to change the economy and policy build over time. When change does occur, a gradual response may give policymakers time to assess the true state of the economy and the possible effects of their decision. One example I can use is the steadfastness of policymakers in the latter part of 2023, when inflation fell more rapidly than was widely expected, and again in early 2024, when it briefly escalated. The FOMC did not change course either time, an approach validated by inertial rules. A non-inertial rule, on the other hand, allows and in fact calls for relatively quick adjustments to policy. The guidance from these rules is more useful when there is a turning point in the economy, and policymakers need to stay ahead of events. One saw these non-inertial rules prescribe a sharper rise in the policy rate above the effective lower bound starting in 2021 as inflation began climbing above the FOMC's 2 percent target. Non-inertial rules are also more useful in the face of major shocks to the economy such as the 2008 financial crisis and the start of the pandemic. The great promise of rules is that they provide a simple and reliable guide to policy, but what should one do when different rules recommend different policy actions given the same economic conditions? Right now, inertial rules tell us to move slowly in reducing policy rates toward a neutral stance that neither restricts nor stimulates the economy. On the other hand, non-inertial rules tell us to cut the policy rate more aggressively, subject to the caveat that one is certain of the values of all the 'star' variables: U*, Y* and r*. I think the answer is that while rules are valuable in helping analyze policy options, they have limitations. Among these are the limits of the data considered, which is typically narrower than the range of data that policymakers use to make decisions, and also the fact that simple policy rules do not take into account risk management, which is often a critical consideration in policy decisions. So, while policy rules serve as a good check on discretionary policy, there are times when discretion is needed. As a result, I prefer to think of them as "policy rules of thumb". Turning to my view for the path for policy, let me discuss three scenarios that I have had in mind to manage the risks of upcoming decisions in the medium term. The first scenario is one where the overall strong economic developments that I have described today continue, with inflation nearing the FOMC's target and the unemployment rate moving up only slightly. This scenario implies to me that we can proceed with moving policy toward a neutral stance at a deliberate pace. This path would be based on the judgment that the risks to both sides of our dual mandate are balanced. In this circumstance, our job is to keep inflation near 2 percent and not slow the economy unnecessarily. Another scenario, less likely in light of recent data, is that inflation falls materially below 2 percent for some time, and/or the labor market significantly deteriorates. The message here is that demand is falling, the FOMC may suddenly be behind the curve, and that message would argue for moving to neutral more quickly by front-loading cuts to the policy rate. The third scenario applies if inflation unexpectedly escalates either because of stronger-than-expected consumer demand or wage pressure, or because of some shock to supply that pushes up inflation. As we learned in the recovery from the pandemic recession, when demand was stronger and supply weaker than initially expected, such surprises do occur. In this circumstance, as long as the labor market isn't deteriorating, we can pause rate cuts until progress resumes and uncertainty diminishes. Most recently, we have seen upward revisions to GDI, an increase in job vacancies, high GDP growth forecasts, a strong jobs report and a hotter than expected CPI report. This data is signaling that the economy may not be slowing as much as desired. While we do not want to overreact to this data or look through it, I view the totality of the data as saying monetary policy should proceed with more caution on the pace of rate cuts than was needed at the September meeting. I will be watching to see whether data, due out before our next meeting, on inflation, the labor market and economic activity confirms or undercuts my inclination to be more cautious about loosening monetary policy. Whatever happens in the near term, my baseline still calls for reducing the policy rate gradually over the next year. The median rate for FOMC participants at the end of 2025 is 3.4 percent, so most of my colleagues likewise expect to reduce policy over the next year. There is less certainty about the final destination. The median estimated longer-run level of the federal funds rate in the Committee's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) is 2.9 percent, but with quite a wide dispersion, ranging from 2.4 percent to 3.8 percent. While much attention is given to the size of cuts over the next meeting or two, I think the larger message of the SEP is that there is a considerable extent of policy restrictiveness to remove, and if the economy continues in its current sweet spot, this will happen gradually. Thank you again, for the opportunity to be part of today's conference, and for allowing me to share some thoughts, relevant to monetary policy rules and my day job back in Washington. The Shadow Committee has elevated the public debate about monetary policy. May you continue to play that role for many years to come. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Pierpaolo Benigno and Gauti B. Eggertsson (2024), "Revisiting the Phillips and Beveridge Curves: Insights from the 2020s Inflation Surge (PDF)," paper presented at "Reassessing the Effectiveness and Transmission of Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23.Return to text 3. See Evan F. Koenig, Robert Leeson, and George A. Kahn, eds. (2012),The Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policy(Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press). I was assisted in this brief history by Board economists James Clouse and Edward Nelson.Return to text 4. See Dale W. Henderson and Warwick J. McKibbin (1993), "A Comparison of Some Basic Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Different Degrees of Instrument Adjustment and Wage Persistence,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 221–317). This paper was also published in the International Finance Discussion Papers series and is available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/1993/458/ifdp458.pdf.Return to text 5. For a variety of Taylor rules and their implication for policy, see theMonetary Policy Report,available on the Board's website athttps://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/publications/mpr_default.htm.Return to text i. Note: On October 14, 2024, a sentence on page 10 was corrected to say "restrictiveness": "I think the larger message of the SEP is that there is a considerable extent of policy restrictiveness to remove, and if the economy continues in its current sweet spot, this will happen gradually."