Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Forum Club of the Palm Beaches, West Palm Beach, Florida Good afternoon.1It is a pleasure to join you for today's meeting of the Forum Club of the Palm Beaches. It is truly humbling for me to be invited to speak to your membership, in the company of the many influential leaders, authors, and other public figures this organization has hosted since its founding in 1976. Before turning to the main topic of my remarks today, I want to briefly share with you a bit about my background. I am one of the longest serving members currently on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board), having served as a Board member since November 26, 2018. As a member of the Board, I am a permanent voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and serve in other capacities—I lead the Board committees on smaller and community banks and on consumer and community affairs and serve as a member on other committees that broadly address supervision and regulation and payments. I also provide input into the full range of matters that come before the Board. I am the first Governor appointed to fill the role created by Congress for someone with demonstrated primary experience working in or supervising community banks, banks with less than $10 billion in assets.2I have been both a banker, working in the community bank owned and operated by my family since 1882, and a bank supervisor—as the Kansas State Bank Commissioner. Early in my career, I spent almost a decade working in public service in several federal government roles, including setting up the Department of Homeland Security after 9/11 and as a Deputy Assistant Secretary and policy advisor to the first Homeland Security Secretary, Tom Ridge. I also served as a counsel on several U.S. House Committees, and as a staff member for the former U.S. Senator from Kansas, Bob Dole. These experiences have provided me with a uniquely broad perspective about the role of government and the functioning of the U.S. economy—from the view of a regulated business, an executive branch agency, the legislative branch, and state and federal regulatory agencies. Throughout my career, but particularly in my current role as a member of the Board of Governors, I have approached my responsibilities in an independent way, relying on facts, analysis, my own experience and judgment, and the pursuit of the congressionally mandated goals that guide the work of the Board. In some cases, this approach has led me to depart from the views of my colleagues. At its September meeting, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate, for the first time since we began tightening to combat inflation, by 1/2 percentage point to 4-3/4 to 5 percent. I dissented from that decision, preferring instead to lower the target range by 1/4 percentage point. In my statement published after the meeting, I agreed with the Committee's assessment that, given the progress we have seen since the middle of 2023 on both lowering inflation and cooling the labor market, it was appropriate to reflect this progress by beginning the process of recalibrating the policy stance toward a more neutral setting. As my statement noted, I preferred a smaller initial cut in the policy rate. With inflation continuing to hover well above our 2 percent goal, I saw the risk that the Committee's large policy action might be interpreted as a premature declaration of victory on our price-stability mandate. In addition, with the U.S. economy remaining strong, moving the policy rate down too quickly, in my view, would carry the risk of stoking demand unnecessarily and potentially reigniting inflationary pressures. My dissent was notable in that the last dissenting vote from a Fed Board member on an FOMC vote occurred nearly 20 years ago. My dissent was guided by my view and interpretation of the available data and my understanding of the Fed's dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices, which I will discuss more in a moment. Everyone in this room knows that experience is important. My experiences have shaped and reinforced my views on how policymakers can best serve the public—narrowly, including in monetary policy decisionmaking and the regulation of the banking industry, but also more broadly in thinking about policymaking in support of an agency's mission balanced with its extensive impact on the affected industry and the U.S. economy. A Pragmatic Approach to PolicymakingA Goal-Oriented ApproachIn the past, I have discussed the role of policymaking from the perspective of a Federal Reserve Board member. But taking a step back, there are some broader themes relevant to agency policymaking more generally, themes that are useful beyond the context of the Federal Reserve. At a basic level, I think of this as a pragmatic approach. It requires tradeoffs to balance regulation while also not inhibiting economic growth. The first question I like to ask when confronted with a policy issue is, "Why are we here?" You may recognize this question from Philosophy 101, but this question also applies to the exercise of executive authority by regulatory agencies. The Federal Reserve has extensive responsibilities, and equally extensive powers, but it must exercise these powers only in furtherance of specific goals established by statute. The sheer scope of the Fed's powers can present a temptation to go beyond the statutory authority. For example, to play a more active role in the allocation of credit, or to displace other sources of bank funding even when market sources of liquidity are functioning well. It could also include the temptation to venture into policy matters unrelated to the Fed's responsibilities that are better addressed by Congress or other policymakers (here, a push for banking sector climate change related regulation comes to mind). The goals Congress has laid out for the Fed are complicated and important. Congress should not expect the Federal Reserve, or any other agency for that matter, to solve problems beyond that agency's limited purpose. Doing so would contravene the intent and authority of Congress. To begin, I will provide a few concrete examples of how the starting point for policy is the agency's mission, including in: (1) the execution of monetary policy, and (2) the conduct of banking regulation and supervision. In conducting monetary policy, Congress has given us the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Achieving these goals has often proven challenging, particularly over the last several years, as these policy objectives can sometimes be in tension. Policy actions to tame inflation, like raising the target range for the federal funds rate, can have an adverse effect on employment. A critical input to the FOMC decisionmaking process is an analysis of economic conditions and outlook. The real economy continues to be strong, with solid momentum in economic activity, robust household spending and business investment, and a healthy labor market that remains near full employment. Although economic conditions have been supportive of our employment mandate, they have been unsatisfying for our price stability mandate as inflation continues to be elevated. We have seen considerable progress in lowering inflation since early 2023, but progress seems to have stalled in recent months. The 12-month measure of core personal consumption expenditures inflation—which excludes food and energy prices—has moved sideways at around 2.7 percent since May, and the latest consumer and producer price index reports point to a similarly elevated or even higher reading for October. The persistently high core inflation largely reflects pressures on housing services prices, perhaps due to an increase in demand for affordable housing and an inelastic supply. Gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a solid pace in the third quarter, maintaining the momentum from the previous four quarters. Growth continued to be driven by private domestic final purchases, as personal consumption, and retail sales in particular, strongly increased last quarter, more than offsetting further weakness in housing activity due to high mortgage rates. Retail sales continued to rise in October, even though Hurricanes Helene and Milton may have exerted a small drag on sales last month. The annual revision of the national income and product accounts confirmed that GDP has been providing the right signal about the ongoing strength in economic activity, as gross domestic income and personal income were revised up considerably for 2023 and the first half of this year. The October employment report seems to have been affected by the recent hurricanes and the Boeing strike. It also featured the lowest response rate to the payroll survey in decades. After accounting for these special factors, it seems that payroll employment continued to increase in October at a pace close to the average monthly gain seen in the second and third quarters. The unemployment rate remained low at 4.1 percent in October, down from 4.3 percent in July. The labor force participation rate remains well below pre-pandemic levels and edged down further in October due to lower prime-age participation. While unemployment is notably higher than a year ago, it is still at a historically low level and below my and the Congressional Budget Office's estimates of full employment. The labor market has loosened from the extremely tight conditions of the past few years. The ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers has been close to the historically elevated pre-pandemic level in recent months. But there are still more available jobs than available workers, a condition that before 2018 has only occurred twice for a prolonged period since World War II, further signaling ongoing labor market strength. Wage growth has slowed further in recent months, but it continues to indicate a tight labor market. The rise in the unemployment rate this year largely reflects weaker hiring, as job seekers entering or re-entering the labor force are taking longer to find work, while layoffs remain low. In addition to some cooling in labor demand, a mismatch between the skills of the new workers and available jobs could further raise unemployment, suggesting that higher unemployment has been partly driven by the stronger supply of workers. Monetary PolicyIn the monetary policy function, we rely on the best data available, but without question the data are imperfect. We also consider a range of possible future economic conditions to help inform our monetary policy decisionmaking, which requires that we make assumptions and predictions about the future. Looking back over time, our crystal ball has never been perfect at predicting the risks that may emerge, how those risks may influence economic conditions, and how that should be considered in analyzing our monetary policy goals. To illustrate this point in terms of recent events, we have not yet met our inflation goal and, as I noted earlier, progress in lowering inflation appears to have stalled. I see greater risks to the price stability side of our mandate, especially while the labor market remains near full employment, but it is also possible that we could see a deterioration in labor market conditions. These predictions always come with a dose of humility, however, particularly because they rely on imperfect data. The labor market data have become increasingly difficult to interpret, as surveys and other measurements struggle to incorporate large numbers of new workers and to account for other influences that we do not yet fully understand and have not yet been able to accurately measure. As the dynamics of immigration and business creation and closures continue to change, it has become increasingly difficult to understand the payroll employment data. In light of the dissonance created by conflicting economic signals, measurement challenges, and data revisions, I remain cautious about taking signal from only a limited set of real-time data releases. While the mandate for monetary policy is straightforward, its execution is complex. Our decisions are guided by our dual mandate, but arriving at them entails careful analysis of sometimes flawed data, and informed judgments about unknowable future conditions. Bank Regulation and SupervisionIn conducting bank regulation and supervision, the Federal Reserve promotes the safe and sound operation of individual banks, and the stability of the broader financial system. These bank regulatory goals have obvious synergies—individual banks operating in a safe and sound manner tends to create conditions that promote financial stability in the banking sector. The Fed's bank regulatory objectives include implicit tradeoffs: we aim to foster a banking system that is safe, sound, and efficient, while serving the U.S. economy, and facilitating economic growth. The objectives must also support the full breadth of the banking system from the very largest to the very smallest. Striking a balance among these competing goals can certainly be a challenge, and policy views on where that balance should be struck may vary. We should approach the task of bank regulation with an understanding and appreciation of these tradeoffs, coupled with an affirmative acknowledgment that the banking system is an important driver of business formation, economic expansion, and opportunity. A banking system that is safe and sound yet irrelevant would not fulfill our regulatory objectives, but would be the inevitable outcome of following a path that strives for elimination of risks rather than promotion of effective risk management. Banks are unique individual businesses, not public utilities. The pursuit of these bank regulatory goals requires an approach that considers a range of regulatory and supervisory tools, from the quantitative—like the setting of bank capital and liquidity requirements—to the more subjective—like evaluating bank management during the examination process. And while the goals themselves seem straightforward, the tools available and the complexity and evolution of the financial system over time present real challenges from a policymaking perspective. When we consider drafting a new regulation, we should always ask "What problem would this new regulation solve?" Policymakers should exercise restraint in the promulgation of a new regulation, by articulating the problem it purports to solve and presenting an efficient way to address it. Identifying the problem that requires addressing often poses one of the most significant challenges. Ideally, the process would begin by identifying the problem, then move to an analysis of whether proposed solutions are within the agency's statutory authorities, and finally whether targeted changes to the regulatory framework could result in improvements, remediation of gaps, or elimination of redundant and unnecessary requirements. But for a number of reasons, the problem identification process can result in misidentification of issues, and a resulting failure to prioritize the most important ones. Take for example the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), and the regulatory response. At its root, this bank's failure exposed significant flaws in the bank's management and the regulators' oversight and supervision. The interest rate and funding risks, rapid growth, and the idiosyncratic business model and concentrated customer base of the bank, were apparent and obvious. These risks were mismanaged by SVB and not acted on early enough by bank supervisors. These were not the only factors contributing to the firm's failure, but these critical elements should have been the key priorities for the supervisory function to address after the bank's failure. And yet in the aftermath of SVB's demise, we have focused on regulatory proposals ranging from substantial increases in bank capital requirements, to pushing down global systemically important bank (G-SIB) and large bank requirements to much smaller firms, finding supervisory deficiencies in the management of well-capitalized and financially sound firms, and considering widespread changes to the funding and liquidity requirements and expectations that apply to all banks. A crisis is not a regulatory blank check. In some ways, it presents heightened risks that should prompt us to show our work even more carefully. A deliberate, transparent, and fact-based approach to pursuing statutory objectives also serves the goal of avoiding the impression of pursuing unrelated policy goals, particularly those that venture into political concerns outside of an agency's purposes or functions. Promoting safety, soundness, and financial stability should not devolve into an exercise of regulatory allocation of credit—picking winners and losers—or promoting an ideological position through more open-ended processes like bank supervision and examination. Effective and Efficient SolutionsOnce we have a clear and thorough understanding of our statutory objectives and have a framework to identify issues, gaps, or redundancies, the next task is to focus on finding efficient solutions to those issues. In doing so, we should consider policy alternatives and perspectives that may differ from our past approach. We should also acknowledge that we may not have all the facts or information necessary to immediately identify an effective solution. Successful policymaking requires openness and humility, caution, and a deliberate approach. With respect to monetary policy, uncertainty surrounding available data and the many variables that can affect future economic conditions suggest that we should pursue a cautious approach. At the most recent meeting in November, the Committee decided to take an additional step along the path of moving toward a more neutral policy setting. I agreed to support this action, since it aligns with my preference to lower the policy rate gradually, especially in light of elevated inflation and the uncertainty about the level of the neutral rate. My estimate of the neutral policy rate is much higher than it was before the pandemic, and therefore we may be closer to a neutral policy stance than we currently think. I would prefer to proceed cautiously in bringing the policy rate down to better assess how far we are from the end point, while recognizing that we have not yet achieved our inflation goal and closely watching the evolution of the labor market. We should also not rule out the risk that the policy rate may attain or even fall below its neutral level before we achieve our price stability goal. It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. At each FOMC meeting, my colleagues and I will make our decisions based on the incoming data and the implications for and risks to the outlook and guided by the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. During each intermeeting period, we typically receive a range of economic data and information. In addition to closely watching the incoming data, I meet with a broad range of contacts to discuss economic conditions as I assess the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance. Especially in light of the data measurement challenges that I mentioned earlier, engaging with contacts helps me interpret the signals provided by the data and gain a better understanding of how the economy is evolving. Consistent with this pragmatic approach, I am pleased that the November post meeting statement included a flexible, data-dependent approach, providing the Committee with optionality in deciding future policy adjustments. As I noted earlier, my view is that inflation remains a concern, and I continue to see price stability as essential for fostering a strong labor market and an economy that works for everyone in the longer term. In banking regulation, this pragmatic approach requires us to consider the costs and benefits of any proposed change, as well as incentive effects, impacts on markets, and potential unintended consequences. But it also means that we must consider the limits of regulatory responsibility—grounded by our statutory objectives—when taking regulatory action. In my view, these considerations apply beyond Federal Reserve policymaking to regulatory actions taken by any agency. As I noted previously, statutory mandates guiding the Fed's bank regulatory responsibilities provide an important grounding for agency action. But they must be viewed in the broader context of promoting an effective and efficient banking system that supports market functioning and encourages economic growth, business creation and expansion, and opportunity. Our responsibility is not to look only at whether a proposal will promote greater safety and soundness, but to consider the broader context, including whether regulatory incentives will skew the allocation of credit, adversely affect capital markets, or push traditional banking activities outside of the banking system into less regulated non-banks. Is the bank regulatory framework efficient? Does it allow banks sufficient freedom and flexibility to operate and meet customer needs? And importantly, are there areas within the approach to regulation and supervision that simply cannot be justified based on a cost-benefit analysis? The answer to the latter is "Yes." There are a number of areas where right-sizing regulation and our supervisory approach would be appropriate and can be done in a way that does not sacrifice safety and soundness or threaten financial stability. Regulation is most effective when it strikes an appropriate balance between competing goals and objectives. In the banking system, this means operating in a safe, sound, and financially stable way, while also supporting economic growth and efficiency. When we fail to consider this broader context, we risk disincentivizing growth, imposing overly burdensome and unnecessary regulations, setting opaque and unreasonable expectations through the supervisory process, and forcing the inefficient allocation of capital. Sometimes this debate escapes from the dusty offices of the banking regulators into plain view, as during the past year on the Basel III Endgame package of bank capital reforms. While this proposal prompted extensive comment from a wide range of commenters, it also inspired a negative television and radio advertising campaign, which is unprecedented for a relatively technical bank regulatory issue. But these ads highlighted an uncomfortable truth: the regulatory approach we took failed to consider or deliver a reasonable proposal, one aligned with the original Basel agreement yet suited to the particulars of the U.S. banking system. Instead, the proposal released last year opted for significant capital increases for some banks, in excess of 20 percent, departing significantly from the approach adopted by our international counterparts. This public engagement has been useful, and it seems to have softened some of the over-calibrated positions underpinning the original capital reform proposal. But this level of public engagement and debate was also a byproduct of the rulemaking process. While regulatory overreach can threaten the credibility of agency action in the eyes of the public, a transparent process allows public commenters to pressure test and pushback on agency action. However, when agencies overwhelm the process by publishing thousands of pages of rulemakings in a short period of time, the public's ability to provide meaningful feedback on our rules is compromised. Last year the federal financial agencies published over 5,000 pages of rules and proposals. And yet, even when the public is able to comment on these voluminous proposals, regulators often ignore this constructive feedback and move forward to publish final rules with minimal or no changes relative to their proposals, as with the Community Reinvestment Act rule. Maintenance of an existing regulatory framework is not glamorous but is perhaps one of the more important agency functions to ensure that the framework is striking the right balance between promoting a strong banking system and supporting economic growth. This requires reviewing and updating regulations to ensure that prior agency actions continue to address problems efficiently as industries and conditions change.3When agencies prioritize the creation of new regulation in the absence of a statutory mandate, harmful and unintended consequences can result. One such example is the adverse effects of regulatory constraints on Treasury market functioning. Rules like the Supplementary Leverage Ratio, the G-SIB Surcharge, and the Liquidity Coverage Ratio pose known and identified constraints on the Treasury market that may contribute to future stress and market disruption if left unaddressed. Finally, while transparency—like that intended by the rulemaking process—can lead to better public engagement and outcomes, it is important that agency actions are transparent even when not legally mandated. The most obvious opportunity for additional transparency in the banking framework is in supervision. Supervision by its nature involves confidential and detailed inquiries into bank operations, with examiners evaluating quantitative measures like capital and liquidity, while making judgmental assessments of the activities and risks of the institution, and its risk-management approach. Supervisory expectations should not surprise regulated firms, and yet transparency of these expectations is often challenging to achieve. In fact, since the failure of SVB supervisory surprises have become more common in bank examinations. In light of the recent Supreme Court cases regarding agency actions, agencies should respond in a way that furthers the goals of transparency and accountability, and act as a check on regulatory overreach. The elimination ofChevrondeference has the potential to transform agency rulemakings positively—in a way that promotes the pragmatic approach I outlined in this discussion. The same considerations we follow in the pursuit of our statutory objectives could help support rulemakings that are built upon a stronger factual and analytical basis, with a thorough and more comprehensive explanation of an agency's policy approach. Closing ThoughtsWhile my remarks today have largely focused on Federal Reserve responsibilities, a pragmatic approach has broader applicability. Agencies can build public support for their activities by following these simple principles—a rigorous focus on statutory objectives, a foundation based on facts and careful analysis in forming policy, crafting efficient solutions, and public transparency and accountability. Agencies and their regulated businesses will benefit from a rigorous process that considers different perspectives, the intended and unintended consequences of decisions, and the costs and benefits of actions. The ability of the banking system to finance the future growth of the U.S. economy hinges upon our ability and willingness to shift our approach to regulation and supervisory oversight. A pragmatic approach to policymaking will better enable the U.S. economy to continue to grow now and into the future. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See 12 U.S.C. § 241.Return to text 3. In February, the Board announced the initiation of its review of its regulations to identify those regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or overly burdensome in accordance with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act. See Michelle W. Bowman (2024),"Statement by Governor Michelle W. Bowman on the Review of the Board's Regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996 (EGRPRA)"press release, February 6.Return to text
Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the 27th Annual Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for Japan and the United States, Washington, D.C. Discussions of artificial intelligence (AI) inevitably center on two main points: risks and benefits.1Both of these can be frustratingly vague and amorphous. Proponents of AI project its widespread adoption will be as momentous as the industrial age—radically improving efficiency, increasing labor productivity, and changing the world economy. Skeptics largely focus on the risks, noting that it may introduce new and unpredictable variables into the economy and the financial system, including new forms of cyber-risk and fraud. It would be impossible to predict what the future holds for AI, or how its use and impact will evolve over time. But as the technology continues to mature, as new use cases evolve, and it is rolled out more broadly, we will almost certainly be surprised by how it is ultimately used. Looking at the financial industry-specific implications of AI, it is helpful to consider not only how it may change the financial system, but also how regulatory frameworks should respond to this emerging technology. Are the existing frameworks sufficient? If not, how can regulators best balance the risks AI may pose to bank safety and soundness and financial stability with the need to allow for continued innovation? Broader availability of generative AI and large language models have created headlines and spiking stock prices, but the financial services sector has been using AI for some time.2Over time, it has become clear that AI's impact could be far-reaching, particularly as the technology becomes more efficient, new sources of data become available, and as AI technology becomes more affordable. Do We Need a Definition of AI?Before discussing the implications of AI and regulatory policy approaches, we should ask whether we need a definition of AI. As it has advanced, the number and variety of definitions used to define AI have expanded.3Some definitions focus on the algorithms—like the use of machines to learn and reason in a way that simulates human intelligence. Others focus on the outputs—the ability to perform complex tasks normally done by humans. In 2021, an interagency request for information from federal banking regulators, including the Federal Reserve, sought comment on banks' use of AI, but notably avoided using any single definition. Instead, this request listed a few possible use cases, features, and forms. These included the use of structured and unstructured data; the use of alternative data sources; voice recognition and natural language processing; the algorithmic identification of patterns and correlations in training data to generate predictions or categorizations; and "dynamic updating," where an algorithm has the capacity to update without human intervention.4 While each definition of AI may serve its own purpose in the context of how it is used, any single narrow definition can be criticized. A more generic definition runs the risk of oversimplifying the range of activities, use cases, and underlying technology. A definition that captures the variability of AI technology in a more granular way runs the risk of being unwieldy in its length, and obsolete in the short-term as new forms and use cases emerge. Within this definitional question—of whether and how you define AI—lies a more important policy question: Specifically, for what purpose is a definition required? In the context of the financial system, the definition of AI may help to delineate how the regulatory system addresses it and establishes the parameters for how it can be used by regulated institutions. Other specific contexts could also be included, like third-party service providers that support banks or other financial services providers, or use by regulators in support of their mandates. A definition helps regulators and regulated institutions understand the activities that are subject to rules and requirements by defining the scope. While this definitional question is important to establish clarity about the scope of what constitutes AI, it can also distract us from a more important point—what is the appropriate policy framework to address the introduction and ongoing use of AI in the financial system? I have no strong feelings about the ideal or optimal definition of AI, and some version of the many definitions floating around are probably adequate for our purposes. At a minimum though, a definition must establish clear parameters about what types of activities and tools are covered. But before leaving the topic, I want to offer a cautionary note. A broad definition of AI arguably captures a wider range of activity and has a longer "lifespan" before it becomes outmoded, and potentially never becomes outdated. But a broad definition also carries the risk of a broad—and undifferentiated—policy response. This vast variability in AI's uses defies a simple, granular definition, but also suggests that we cannot adopt a one-size-fits-all approach as we consider the future role of AI in the financial system. Innovation and CompetitivenessKnowing that the technology and use of AI continues to evolve leads to the question of how it should be viewed by regulators, particularly in light of the need for innovation and the effect on competition. InnovationAI tools have the potential to substantially enhance the financial industry. In my view, the regulatory system should promote these improvements in a way that is consistent with applicable law and appropriate banking practices. One of the most common current use cases is in reviewing and summarizing unstructured data. This can include enlisting AI to summarize a single report or to aggregate information from different sources on the same or related topics. The AI "output" in these cases may not directly produce any real-world action, but it provides information in a more usable way to assist a human. AI use cases like this may present opportunities to improve operational efficiency, without introducing substantial new risk into business processes. In some ways, the joining of AI outputs with a human acting as a "filter" or "reality check" can capture efficiency gains and control for some AI risks. Similarly, AI can act as a "filter" or "reality check" on analysis produced by humans, checking for potential errors or biases. AI tools may also be leveraged to fight fraud. One such use is in combatting check fraud, which has become more prevalent in the banking industry over the last several years. In a recent report, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network noted that from February to August of 2023, there were over 15,000 reports received related to check fraud, associated with more than $688 million in transactions (including both actual and attempted fraud).5The growth in check fraud over the past several years has caused significant harm not only to banks and the perceived safety of the banking system but also to consumers who are the victims of fraudulent activity. The regulatory response to help address this growing problem has unfortunately been slow, lacking in coordination, and generally ineffective. Could AI tools offer a more effective way for banks to fight against this growing fraud trend? We already have some evidence that AI tools are powerful in fighting fraud. The U.S. Treasury Department recently announced that fraud detection tools, including machine learning AI, had resulted in fraud prevention and recovery totaling over $4 billion in fiscal year 2024, including $1 billion in recovery related to identification of Treasury check fraud.6While the nature of the fraud may be different in these cases, we should recognize that AI can be a strong anti-fraud tool and provide significant benefits for affected bank customers. If our regulatory environment is not receptive to the use of AI in these circumstances customers are the ones who suffer. AI will not completely "solve" the problem of fraud—particularly as fraudsters develop more sophisticated ways to exploit this technology. But it could be important if the regulatory framework provides reasonable parameters for its use. Another often-discussed use case for AI in financial services is in expanding the availability of credit. AI is not the first technology with potential to expand access to credit for the "un-" or "underbanked." We have long viewed alternative data as a potential opportunity for some consumers, like those with poor or no credit history but with sufficient cash flow to support loan repayment.7 AI could be used to further expand this access, as financial entities mine more data sets and refine their understanding of creditworthiness. Of course, we also know that using AI in this context—in a way that has more direct impact on credit decisions affecting individual customers—also presents more substantial legal compliance challenges than other AI use cases. AI also has promise to improve public sector operations, including in regulatory agencies. As I have often noted, the data relied on to inform the Federal Open Market Committee decision-making process often is subject to revisions after-the-fact, requiring caution when relying on the data to inform monetary policy.8Perhaps the broader use of AI could act as a check on data reliability, particularly for uncertain or frequently revised economic data, improving the quality of the data that monetary policymakers rely on for decision-making. Additional data as a reliability check or expanded data resources informed by AI could improve the FOMC's monetary policymaking by validating and improving the data on which policymakers rely. While these use cases present only a subset of the possibilities for the financial system, they illustrate the breadth of potential benefits and risks of adopting an overly cautious approach that chills innovation in the banking system. Over-regulation of AI can itself present risks by preventing the realization of benefits of improved efficiency, lower operational costs, and better fraud prevention and customer service. Effect on CompetitionThe regulatory approach and framework can also promote competition in the development and use of AI tools in the financial system. An overly conservative regulatory approach can skew the competitive landscape by pushing activities outside of the regulated banking system or preventing the use of AI altogether. Inertia often causes regulators to reflexively prefer known practices and existing technology over process change and innovation. The banking sector often suffers from this regulatory skepticism, which can ultimately harm the competitiveness of the U.S. banking sector. In the United States, we often think about the financial system based on the regulatory "perimeter." We view institutions within the scope of federal banking regulation (banks and their affiliates) as being "in the perimeter," while entities that operate under other regulatory frameworks (including money transmitters licensed under state law) are "outside the perimeter." Of course, the global financial system includes institutions that operate on a cross-border basis, and tools and approaches often permeate throughout the financial system once they have been deployed successfully in some other part of the system. But we know that the regulatory perimeter is permeable, and there is always the risk that activity pushed outside the perimeter can transmit risk back into the system even as the activities garner less scrutiny and regulation than banks. Put differently, the overly conservative approach may present only a façade of safety, masking underlying risks to the financial system and those who rely on it. Of course, there are risks to being overly permissive in the AI regulatory approach. As with any rapidly evolving technology, supervision of its use should be nimble. Its users must make sufficient risk-management and compliance investments to conduct activities in a safe and sound manner, and in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. While the banking system has generally been cautious and deliberate in its AI development and rollout, others have not. When left improperly managed and unmonitored, it can result in unintended outcomes and customer harm. For example, certain generative AI models have been known to generate nonsensical or inaccurate outputs, sometimes called "hallucinations." In some cases, AI hallucinations have not involved significant harm, for example when discovered in a testing environment without customer-facing implications. The Sufficiency of Existing Regulatory ToolsWhile helpful to acknowledge the risks of over-regulation and under-regulation, we must understand our currently regulatory stance—what tools do we have to promote AI's benefits while helping to mitigate the risks? To address this topic, we should widen the lens to consider our approach to innovation broadly. Supporting innovation in the financial system can and should apply to the introduction and use of AI.9 When we consider AI risks, many of these are already well-covered by existing frameworks. For example, AI often depends on external parties—cloud computing providers, licensed generative AI technologies, and core service providers—to operate. AI can also pose model risks in the banking context, with associated data management and governance concerns. AI can also impact a bank's cyber-resiliency as AI-related fraud tools become more widespread and more anti-fraud tools become available. While AI may be on the frontier of technology, it does not operate outside the existing legal and regulatory framework. AI is not exempt from current legal and regulatory requirements, nor is its use exempt from scrutiny. This is particularly true with AI; its use must comply with current laws and regulations, including fair lending, cyber security, data privacy, third-party risk management, and copyright. And when AI is deployed in a bank, an even broader set of requirements may apply depending on the use case. Regulators are often playing "catch-up" with banks at the forefront of innovation. As a result, they often suffer from significant disadvantages in terms of understanding how the technology works, understanding the uses of AI within financial institutions, and keeping up-to-date with the latest AI developments. Of course, further compounding this challenge is that much of the work in AI innovation occurs far outside the banking system, including in the development and testing of generative AI models and in compiling the data sources on which to train the models. Despite these challenges—and the understandable regulatory instinct to limit its use in the financial system—we must avoid this temptation. A few general principles should govern a coherent regulatory approach, which are the same principles that I apply to innovation generally.10 First, we must understand AI before we consider whether and how to change our regulatory approach. With respect to various internal use cases, the Board has published a compliance program that governs artificial intelligence.11One of the foundational elements for a successful approach to AI, and one mentioned in this plan, is the development and acquisition of staff expertise. Many banks have increased AI adoption to an expanding number of use cases. As this technology becomes more widely adopted throughout the financial system, it is critical that we have a coherent and rational policy approach. That starts with our ability to understand the technology, including both the algorithms underlying its use and the possible implications—both good and bad—for banks and their customers. In suggesting that we grow our understanding and staff expertise as a baseline, I acknowledge that this has been, and is likely to remain, a challenge. The Federal Reserve and other banking regulators compete for the same limited pool of talent as private industry. But we must prioritize improving our understanding and capacity as this technology continues to become more widely adopted. Second, we must have an openness to the adoption of AI. We need to have a receptivity to the use of this technology and know that successful adoption requires communication and transparency between regulated firms and regulators. One approach regulators can use to reframe questions around AI (and innovation generally) is to adopt a posture that I think of as technology agnosticism. We should avoid fixating on the technology, and instead focus on the risks presented by different use cases. These risks may be influenced by a number of factors, including the scope and consequences of the use case, the underlying data relied on, and the capability of a firm to appropriately manage these risks. Putting activities together may be a helpful way to get a sense of broad trends (for example, the speed of AI adoption in the industry), but is inefficient as a way to address regulatory concerns (like safety and soundness, and financial stability). This may seem like an obvious point, but at times regulators have fallen prey to overbroad categorizations, treating a diverse set of activities as uniformly and equally risky. This approach allows us to be risk-focused, much like we try to do with other forms of supervision, moderating intensity for low-risk activities, and increasing the intensity for higher-risk ones. Of course, regulatory agencies do not operate in a vacuum, so we must also ask what type of coordination we need to ensure that we promote safe and sound adoption of AI, and address broader financial stability risks, both domestically and internationally. As a threshold matter, we need coordination both within each agency and among domestic regulators that play a role in the supervision and regulation of the financial system, which requires an environment of open sharing of information. A posture of openness to AI requires caution when adding to the body of regulation. Specifically, I think we need a gap analysis to determine if there are regulatory gaps or blind spots that could require additional regulation and whether the current framework is fit for purpose. Fundamentally though, the variability in the technology will almost certainly require a degree of flexibility in regulatory approach. Closing ThoughtsBefore closing, I want to thank the organizers of this event for the invitation to address you this evening, and to thank the many speakers and participants who have contributed to the symposium. Artificial intelligence has tremendous potential to reshape the financial services industry and the broader world economy. While I have suggested in my remarks that we need not rush to regulate, it is important that we continue to monitor developments in AI and their real-world effects. In the long run, AI has the potential to impact many aspects of the Fed's work, from our role in supervising the payment system, to the important work we do promoting the safe and sound operation of banks and financial stability. AI may also play a growing role in monetary policy discussions, as the introduction of AI tools alter labor markets, affecting productivity and potentially the natural rate of unemployment and the natural rate of interest. But as we engage in ongoing monitoring—and expand our understanding of AI technology and how it fits within the bank regulatory framework—I think it is important to preserve the ability of banks to innovate and allow the banking system to realize the benefits of this new technology. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. In 2017, the Financial Stability Board was already considering the financial stability implications of AI and machine learning in financial services. See Financial Stability Board,"Artificial intelligence and machine learning in financial services: Market developments and financial stability implications" (PDF)(Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 2017).Return to text 3. The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020, 15 U.S.C. § 9401(3) defines artificial intelligence as "… a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations or decisions influencing real or virtual environments. Artificial intelligence systems use machine and human-based inputs to-(A) perceive real and virtual environments; (B) abstract such perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner; and (C) use model inference to formulate options for information or action."Return to text 4. SeeRequest for Information and Comment on Financial Institutions' Use of Artificial Intelligence, Including Machine Learning, 86 Fed. Reg. 16837 (March 31, 2021) (PDF).Return to text 5. Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,Financial Trend Analysis: Mail Theft-Related Check Fraud: Threat Pattern & Trend Information, February to August 2023(PDF)(Vienna: Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, September 2024).Return to text 6. See U.S. Department of the Treasury,"Treasury Announces Enhanced Fraud Detection Processes, Including Machine Learning AI, Prevented and Recovered Over $4 Billion in Fiscal Year 2024,"news release, October 17, 2024.Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,"Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting," (PDF)news release, December 12, 2019.Return to text 8. See Michelle W. Bowman,"Perspectives on U.S. Monetary Policy and Bank Capital Reform," (PDF)(speech at Policy Exchange, London, England, June 25, 2024).Return to text 9. See Michelle W. Bowman,"Innovation and the Evolving Financial Landscape" (PDF)(speech at The Digital Chamber DC Blockchain Summit 2024, Washington, D.C., May 15, 2024).Return to text 10. See Bowman, "Innovation and the Evolving Financial Landscape."Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,Compliance Plan for OMB Memorandum M-24-10(PDF)(Washington: Board of Governors, September 2024).Return to text
Governor Adriana D. Kugler At the Albert Hirschman Lecture, 2024 Annual Meeting of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association and the Latin American and Caribbean Chapter of the Econometric Society, Montevideo, Uruguay Thank you for your generous introduction, Marcela, and thank you for the opportunity to be here and speak to you today.1I believe I am the first central banker from the U.S. to address this annual meeting, but I know, and am proud to say, that I am the first who is also Latin American. And, of course, I have been part of the LACEA Executive Committee and I have presented papers at many LACEA conferences over the years, so it is a pleasure to be back here among many colleagues. When the United States suffered very high inflation beginning in 2021, it was a new and unfamiliar experience for many too young to recall the last time this occurred in the 1970s and 1980s. Of course, very high inflation is not such a distant memory for people from Latin America and the Caribbean, and that includes me. Growing up in Colombia, I vividly recall the daily challenges of trying to plan and live with sustained double-digit inflation, and I especially remember the pain it imposed on disadvantaged people. Gaining control over inflation requires a commitment by society to accept the tradeoffs and sacrifices often needed, and it also requires deliberate and principled decision making by central banks.2Central bankers must both formulate their best judgment of the correct policies that will achieve a desired level of inflation and follow through by executing and maintaining those policies. It has been widely recognized—and is a finding of economic research—that central bank independence is fundamental to achieving good policy and good economic outcomes. It is not sufficient by itself to achieve those goals, but, over time, it is almost always necessary. Let me start by defining terms. An independent central bank is one that can carry out monetary policy insulated from pressures arising from other parts of government or elsewhere. When there is central bank independence, the role of national or jurisdictional governments is typically one of representing the public in specifying a mandate for the central bank and holding the central bank accountable by monitoring its performance and appointing central bank leadership. In this arrangement, the public, through representative government, specifies the overall objectives that central banks should pursue. Some noteworthy examples of central bank mandates include the dual mandate established by the U.S. Congress that requires the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to promote maximum employment and price stability. The European Central Bank's primary mandate of price stability is spelled out in a treaty enacted by the legislatures of its constituent member states. The central bank of Brazil pursues price stability as its primary objective as well. In the United Kingdom, its parliament has mandated that the Bank of England pursue monetary and financial stability.3Similarly, the objectives of the central banks of Chile and Uruguay are both to keep inflation low and stable and to foster the stability and efficiency of the financial system. Before we discuss why monetary policy independence can benefit the economy, let me take a step back and discuss the tradeoffs associated with the conduct of monetary policy. Central banks significantly influence prices, interest rates, employment, and income in the economy, so it is natural that sometimes there would be differing views on their decisions. For instance, monetary policy actions that promote economic activity and employment growth can put upward pressure on inflation. Conversely, policies to lower inflation tend to slow economic activity and employment growth. This tradeoff typically means that returning inflation to a specific target level when inflation has been allowed to run high may require more restrictive policy and a reduction in demand and higher unemployment. As I pointed out in a speech last spring at Stanford University, however, we have seen this tradeoff dissipate over the past couple of years, pointing to the possibility that we have been now for some time on the steep part of the Phillips curve, where inflation can come down substantially without a big increase in unemployment. Yet there is a possibility that this tradeoff may become more prominent as we move toward the flatter part of the Phillips curve. The economic literature points out that striking a balance in these tradeoffs can be difficult for an elected or otherwise representative government for various reasons. One reason highlighted in the literature is that an elected government may be naturally focused on the short-term goals of its constituents and may have an incentive to try to lower the unemployment rate in the short run, with less concern about the longer-term effects on inflation and growth. The literature has labeled this fundamental problem "time inconsistency."4This incentive may generate undesirable economic cycles, potentially destabilizing prices. And if the public learns over time that the central bank is responsive to these incentives to increase inflation to boost employment temporarily, expectations of future inflation would rise, a symptom of a loss of credibility of the monetary policy authority. Governments also may have an incentive to increase inflation to monetize their debts, which become effectively smaller as the purchasing power of money declines. Also, if elected officials are responsible for monetary policy decisions, the typical alternation in control of government between different parties may lead to different preferences in the tradeoff between employment and inflation, destabilizing prices and the economy in the long term.5In summary, economic research argues that demands on government to address concerns in the short term may result in excessively discretionary monetary policy and do not provide the best incentives for effective monetary policy that promotes the long-term health of the economy. A solution devised by governments and explored in economic research is to delegate monetary policy to an independent entity: the central bank.6By establishing policy mandates in laws or treaties, the government voluntarily constrains itself from suddenly altering policy, and thus it also discourages public pressure to do so. As in Homer'sOdyssey,in which Odysseus asks his crew to tie him to the mast of his ship to avoid being bewitched by the Sirens' songs, policy mandates help central banks avoid being swayed by short-term desires to the detriment of longer-term goals. Now that we have discussed the reasons for delegating the authority to conduct monetary policy to an independent entity, we are left with the task of describing how such independence should be designed and implemented in practice. There are two broad categories of central bank independence. The first of these is goal independence—to what extent is the central bank free to define its goals? The research literature makes a distinction between instrument independence—the prerogative to make monetary policy decisions, which I will discuss more later—and goal independence.7In particular, the Federal Reserve's goals are defined by law, so it is not goal independent. Nevertheless, in spelling out those goals, the law provides the Federal Reserve with some degree of independence in defining them in detail. First, let's talk about the extent to which the law has defined the Federal Reserve's monetary policy goals. Unlike some other central banks that target inflation, the FOMC has been handed two coequal goals—maximum employment and price stability. The Committee is not free to pursue one or the other—it must pursue both. And these two sides of the mandate are pretty clear. Maximum employment means, in effect, the lowest unemployment rate that is consistent with stable prices. The law does not spell out a level of inflation that fulfills the goal of stable prices, but it has traditionally been viewed as a low and stable inflation rate. Mandates limit goal independence, but the form of those mandates can allow some role for the central bank in setting out its goals. The 1977 law defined the Federal Reserve's dual mandate, allowing the FOMC to work out the details. In 2012, the FOMC defined price stability as a longer-run annual inflation rate of 2 percent, as measured by the Commerce Department's estimate of the rate of increase in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. Because maximum employment is unobserved and likely changes over time, it can be estimated only with considerable uncertainty; thus, the Committee chose not to define it in numerical terms. But Committee participants estimate a related number, the longer-run rate of unemployment, which is published every three months in the Summary of Economic Projections. Another aspect of independence is instrument independence, which affords central banks flexibility in how to use the tools of monetary policy, such as policy interest rates, to achieve their goals. In the case of the FOMC, instrument independence has allowed it to adopt new ways to achieve its goals, as the financial system has evolved over the decades. This has been particularly important when the economy faced unprecedented challenges, as it did during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis and during the 2020 pandemic. Because of this flexibility, the Federal Reserve Board and the FOMC were able to respond promptly and, as it turned out, very effectively. Across countries and jurisdictions, goal independence and instrument independence have different dimensions and many variations. In some countries, including India, Brazil, and South Korea, the targets for inflation rates are jointly decided by the central bank and the ministry of finance. In contrast, the central banks of Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru, among others, are given authority to choose their own inflation objectives. To understand how governments have come to embrace the independence of central banks, it is helpful to review how they have evolved from their origins in the 17th century. Sweden's Riksbank was established by the private sector in 1688 to lend the government funds, and the Bank of England followed in 1694, with a similar structure and purpose.8Other European central banks followed in the 19th century and a wave of many more in the 20th, including the Federal Reserve. At different times, these central banks made the transition from wholly private to wholly public institutions and became accountable to government, and by the mid-20th century, there was a growing recognition that independence made for a more practical and, ultimately, more effective central bank. In the United States, the moment of truth came in 1951. During World War II, the Federal Reserve had agreed to peg interest rates on Treasury securities in order to ensure smooth funding of the war effort, and after the war, it continued to peg the longer-term Treasury rate. In the early 1950s, inflation soared, but Treasury favored continuing a cap on longer-term interest rates so that debt management costs could continue to be low during the Korean War. After a series of high-level meetings, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury reached an agreement in 1951 that freed the Fed from the obligation to fix interest rates and allowed it to use monetary policy independently to pursue national economic goals. Researchers have analyzed the historical experiences of particular central banks, such as the Federal Reserve, to understand the transition toward central bank independence and how it affects economic performance.9In addition, researchers have also developed large cross-country indexes measuring the level of central bank independence while capturing multifaceted aspects of this independence based on banks' legal statutes over long periods.10The empirical regularity that stands out in many different studies analyzing these indexes is the rise in central bank independence starting in the 1980s, with studies analyzing at least 120 countries.11 Economic research has cited several factors driving this adoption of central bank independence. In the 1980s and 1990s, emerging economies saw central bank independence as a way to facilitate access to global trade and financial markets, which were liberalized during that time.12Another important factor was the experience of developing country debt crises during this period, which led to demands by creditor banks and international lenders for central bank independence.13 To whatever extent these other factors pushed governments toward central bank independence, a consensus developed that such an arrangement yielded better economic outcomes. Based on measures of central bank independence, researchers indeed have found a relationship between independence and lower inflation, especially for advanced economies.14While evidence of a negative relationship between independence and inflation has been a bit more elusive in the case of emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs), the economic literature does find a relationship between independence and lower inflation volatility in these countries.15Among the reasons I would cite for why it is more difficult to find a relationship between independence and lower inflation in EMDEs is that legal measures of central bank independence, also called "de jure independence," may not reflect the relationship between the central bank and the government that exists in practice—referred to as "de facto independence." In countries where the rule of law is not as strongly embedded in their institutions, there can be wide gaps between the formal, legal institutional arrangements and their practical effect.16Indeed, alternative measures of independence, such as turnover of central bank governors, point to de facto measures being negatively associated with inflation, especially in emerging economies.17Another possible reason is that emerging economies may be more exposed to volatile shocks and governmental regime changes, leading to greater turnover in central bank leadership and clouding the relationship between central bank independence and inflation.18 The relationship between central bank independence and lower inflation and inflation volatility is therefore clear. But the connection to faster growth in economic activity is not. On the one hand, the primary reason for central bank independence in most countries with a single mandate is to provide price stability, so the lack of association between monetary policy independence and adverse economic consequences is not surprising.19On the other hand, indexes of central bank independence may be biased. Most indexes of central bank independence tend to penalize the presence of additional mandates or responsibilities beyond price stability.20However, a mandate that excludes full employment does not seem optimal, given that a central banker should focus on the consequences of its actions on long-term growth and economic activity. Research has emphasized complementarities between price stability, economic stability, and financial stability, providing a rationale for these overlapping objectives at many central banks.21Also, in practice, although the recent inflation run-up showcased the commitment of most central banks to fight inflation, it also appears that they have been willing to provide some accommodation after having gained greater confidence that inflationary pressures have dissipated. In fact, most central banks have initiated an easing cycle even with inflation still somewhat above their respective targets and regardless of the presence or not of an employment goal in their mandates. So if central bank independence does improve inflation outcomes, one question is how it accomplishes this. Let me return to an issue I mentioned earlier: credibility. If the central bank is credible about its longer-run inflation target, it would be a natural outcome that long-run inflation expectations will tend to be closer to the target than when that credibility is lacking. And a central bank will be more credible if it takes actions that lead the public to be confident that the central bank is actively pursuing its stated goal. It is possible to formalize the channel through which a central bank chooses a long-run inflation target and the public slowly learns about its commitment to achieving it, thus gradually anchoring long-run expectations.22The public observes inflation and economic activity outcomes as well as the central bank actions (say, changes in the federal funds rate), and it updates its long-run inflation expectations, which, in this model, coincide with its perception of the long-run target. For instance, a nominal interest rate that is higher than expected, given observed inflation and economic activity and the public's long-run inflation expectations, leads to an updated—lower—value of the perceived inflation target. If the central bank's policy actions are consistent with its long-run inflation goal, the public's long-run expectations will gradually settle at the central bank's long-run goal: This dynamic will anchor inflation expectations to the long-run target. The stock of credibility of a central bank will be reflected in long-run inflation expectations moving in a relatively narrow range close to the stated inflation goal. Conversely, inconsistent actions will imply that agents will update their long-run expectations higher or lower, depending on the direction of surprises in central bank actions, causing de-anchoring of expectations. Despite a very large inflation shock starting in 2021, available measures of long-run inflation expectations, such as those in the Survey of Professional Forecasters or the Livingston Survey, increased just a bit compared with the inflation run-up and quickly descended in 2023. That can be taken as a sign of anchoring and sufficient central bank credibility through the lens of the model just described. And, to the extent that long-run inflation expectations matter to the dynamics of actual inflation, such as in some Phillips curve models, anchoring of inflation expectations is one of the key elements leading to stable inflation.23 The model also offers an interpretation of and a contrast to the behavior of inflation and inflation expectations during the Great Inflation of the 1970s and in the post-pandemic period. As inflation rose in the 1970s and monetary policy actions failed to rein it in, the Federal Reserve lost credibility, and longer-term expectations of future inflation rose toward the end of the decade. The Federal Reserve struggled for years to rebuild that credibility, resulting in high and volatile inflation. Conversely, in the recent episode, inflation has traveled a long way from its peak, with no deterioration in economic activity and comparatively limited movement in long-run inflation expectations. Credibility is enhanced by transparency and accountability, and I will conclude with a discussion of how these principles are carried out by the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve seeks to explain as clearly as possible what it is trying to do in carrying out its dual-mandate objectives and how it is trying to do it. Such transparency and accountability are necessary under our democratic system but are perhaps especially important for the Federal Reserve, which has been assigned such an important role in promoting a healthy economy. In addition to conferring legitimacy for decisions, transparency makes monetary policy more effective, as the public better understands our monetary policy reaction function, which informs the public on how our decisions are shaped by economic conditions. Monetary policy works in part by trying to influence the public's view of future economic conditions, so it is crucial that these intentions are clearly communicated. The Federal Reserve promotes transparency by issuing a postmeeting statement explaining its decision and then following up with more detailed minutes three weeks later. Every three months, FOMC participants' projections for inflation, unemployment, economic activity, and the likely path of monetary policy are published in the Summary of Economic Projections. The Chair conducts press conferences after each FOMC meeting, and both the Chair and FOMC participants further explain their reasoning on policy in speeches, news interviews, and other public appearances. The Chair testifies to Congress on monetary policy twice a year, responding to questions from lawmakers. Transcripts of FOMC meetings are published after five years. More recently, the Fed has adopted the practice of periodically reviewing its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, including holding publicFed Listenssessions around the country to get public input. Transparency is likewise seen in other economies as fundamental to monetary policy independence, which has increasingly been recognized for delivering better policy decisions that are more focused on the longer-term health of an economy. Research continues to add to our understanding of the extent of these better outcomes in different economies and also how independence works in different institutional arrangements. The goal, of course, is more stable economies that deliver broadly rising living standards—in Latin America, the Caribbean, and around the world. Let me now turn to the current economic outlook in the United States and how our monetary policy independence has permitted us to get where we are now. The United States has seen considerable disinflation while experiencing a cooling but still resilient labor market. Numbers just released this week show headline and core PCE inflation have fallen substantially from 7.1 percent to an estimated 2.3 percent and from 5.6 percent to an estimated 2.8 percent, respectively. While wage moderation and anchored inflation expectations may allow us to continue making progress on inflation, stubborn housing inflation and high inflation in certain goods and services categories may stall progress in reaching our target. At the same time, labor markets have rebalanced, given greater labor supply from immigration and prime-age workers and lower demand from restrictive monetary policy. Thus, although the labor market experienced an extended period of low unemployment and job creation these past several years and strong real wage growth, the labor market has cooled. This combination of a continued but slowing trend in disinflation and cooling labor markets means that we need to continue paying attention to both sides of our mandate. If any risks arise that stall progress or reaccelerate inflation, it would be appropriate to pause our policy rate cuts. But if the labor market slows down suddenly, it would be appropriate to continue to gradually reduce the policy rate. Thank you again for inviting me to address you today. I would be glad to spend some time on further discussion of my presentation and to respond to your other questions. ReferencesAlesina, Alberto, and Andrea Stella (2010). "The Politics of Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,Handbook of Monetary Economics,vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1001–54. Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 25 (May), pp. 151–62. Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 91 (August), pp. 589–610. Binder, Sarah, and Mark Spindel (2017).The Myth of Independence: How Congress Governs the Federal Reserve.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024).Monetary Policy Report (PDF).Washington: Board of Governors, July. Bordo, Michael D. (2007). "A Brief History of Central Banks," Economic Commentary. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December. Calvo, Guillermo A. (1978). "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,"Econometrica,vol. 46 (November), pp. 1411–28. Crowe, Christopher, and Ellen E. Meade (2008). "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"European Journal of Political Economy,vol. 24 (December), pp 763–77. Cukierman, Alex (2008). "Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policymaking Institutions—Past, Present and Future,"European Journal of Political Economy,vol. 24 (December), pp. 722–36. Cukierman, Alex, Geoffrey P. Miller, and Bilin Neyapti (2002). "Central Bank Reform, Liberalization and Inflation in Transition Economies—An International Perspective."Journal of Monetary Economics,vol. 49 (2), pp. 237-264. Cukierman, Alex, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992). "Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes,"World Bank Economic Review,vol. 6 (3), pp. 353–98. Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?" in Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed.,Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers,Conference Series 38. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195–221. Dincer, Nergiz, Barry Eichengreen, and Joan J. Martinez (2024). "Central Bank Independence: Views from History and Machine Learning,"Annual Review of Economics,vol. 16 (August), pp. 393–428. Fischer, Stanley (1994). "Modern Central Banking," in Forrest Capie, Stanley Fischer, Charles Goodhart, and Norbert Schnadt, eds.,The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England.Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. Garriga, Ana Carolina, and Cesar M. Rodriguez (2020). "More Effective Than We Thought: Central Bank Independence and Inflation in Developing Countries,"Economic Modelling,vol. 85 (February), pp. 87–105. Jácome, Luis I., and Francisco Vázquez (2008). "Is There Any Link between Legal Central Bank Independence and Inflation? Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean,"European Journal of Political Economy,vol. 24 (December), pp. 788–801. Kiley, Michael T. (2008). "Monetary Policy Actions and Long-Run Inflation Expectations," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Kiley, Michael T., and Frederic S. Mishkin (2024), "Central Banking Post Crises," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2024-035. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,"Journal of Political Economy,vol. 85 (June), pp. 473–91. Maxfield, Sylvia (1997).Gatekeepers of Growth: The International Political Economy of Central Banking in Developing Countries.Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (1993). "Designing Institutions for Monetary Stability,"Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,vol. 39 (December), pp. 53–84. Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,"Quarterly Journal of Economics,vol. 100 (November), pp. 1169–89. Romelli, Davide (2024). "Trends in Central Bank Independence: A De-jure Perspective (PDF)," Working Paper 217. Milan: BAFFI Centre on Economics, Finance and Regulation, Bocconi University, February. Vuletin, Guillermo, and Ling Zhu (2011). "Replacing a 'Disobedient' Central Bank Governor with a 'Docile' One: A Novel Measure of Central Bank Independence and Its Effect on Inflation,"Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,vol. 43 (September), pp. 1185–1215. Walsh, Carl E. (2003).Monetary Theory and Policy,2nd ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See the box "Monetary Policy Independence, Transparency, and Accountability" in Board of Governors (2024, pp. 42–44).Return to text 3. The European Central Bank, the central bank of Brazil, and the Bank of England have as additional objectives, without the prejudice of their monetary stability mandates, to contribute to economic growth.Return to text 4. Research on "time inconsistency" was pioneered by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978). This problem was analyzed in more detail in the context of monetary policy by Barro and Gordon (1983).Return to text 5. Alesina and Stella (2010) and Kiley and Mishkin (2024) provide summaries of the literature on rules versus discretion.Return to text 6. Rogoff (1985) suggested the appointment of a central banker predisposed toward keeping inflation low and stable as a solution to the time-inconsistency problem; additional discussions are presented in Persson and Tabellini (1993) and Walsh (2003, chap. 8).Return to text 7. See Debelle and Fischer (1994) and Fischer (1994).Return to text 8. See Bordo (2007).Return to text 9. For a review of the historical experience of the United States in particular, see Binder S, Spindel M. (2017).Return to text 10. One early index is due to Cukierman, Webb, and Neyapti (1992). It captures some aspects of various institutional arrangements, such as the presence of a mandate on price stability or additional mandates.Return to text 11. See Dincer, Eichengreen, and Martinez (2024). See also Romelli (2024).Return to text 12. See Maxfield (1997).Return to text 13. See Cukierman (2008).Return to text 14. See Crowe and Meade (2008).Return to text 15. See Garriga and Rodriguez (2020).Return to text 16. Cukierman and others (2002) provide some evidence on the relationship between inflation and central bank independence across different countries.Return to text 17. See, for instance, Jácome and Vázquez (2008) and Vuletin and Zhu (2011).Return to text 18. See Jácome and Vázquez (2008).Return to text 19. For instance, Alesina and Summers (1993) find no increase in business cycle volatility in developed countries.Return to text 20. Take, for instance, the very recently updated index by Romelli (2024): The joint presence of price stability together with economic growth or full employment or responsibilities in bank supervision, as is the case for the Federal Reserve, depresses the score.Return to text 21. See Kiley and Mishkin (2024).Return to text 22. Kiley (2008) develops a model in which the public does not observe the central bank inflation target and it has to infer the target from observations on macro variables and interest rates. Long-run inflation expectations in Kiley's model are the optimal estimates of the unobserved long-run target. The estimates in Kiley (2008) suggest that the updating of long-run inflation expectations is affected by monetary policy, in contrast to alternative frameworks, such as adaptive expectations.Return to text 23. See Yellen (2015).Return to text
Chair Jerome H. Powell At Conversation with Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell, Dallas, Texas Good afternoon. Thank you to the World Affairs Council, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and the Dallas Regional Chamber for the kind invitation to be with you today. I will start with some brief comments on the economy and monetary policy. Looking back, the U.S. economy has weathered a global pandemic and its aftermath and is now back to a good place. The economy has made significant progress toward our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. The labor market remains in solid condition. Inflation has eased substantially from its peak, and we believe it is on a sustainable path to our 2 percent goal. We are committed to maintaining our economy's strength by returning inflation to our goal while supporting maximum employment. Recent Economic DataEconomic growthThe recent performance of our economy has been remarkably good, by far the best of any major economy in the world. Economic output grew by more than 3 percent last year and is expanding at a stout 2.5 percent rate so far this year. Growth in consumer spending has remained strong, supported by increases in disposable income and solid household balance sheets. Business investment in equipment and intangibles has accelerated over the past year. In contrast, activity in the housing sector has been weak. Improving supply conditions have supported this strong performance of the economy. The labor force has expanded rapidly, and productivity has grown faster over the past five years than its pace in the two decades before the pandemic, increasing the productive capacity of the economy and allowing rapid economic growth without overheating. The labor marketThe labor market remains in solid condition, having cooled off from the significantly overheated conditions of a couple of years ago, and is now by many metrics back to more normal levels that are consistent with our employment mandate. The number of job openings is now just slightly above the number of unemployed Americans seeking work. The rate at which workers quit their jobs is below the pre-pandemic pace, after touching historic highs two years ago. Wages are still increasing, but at a more sustainable pace. Hiring has slowed from earlier in the year. The most recent jobs report for October reflected significant effects from hurricanes and labor strikes, making it difficult to get a clear signal. Finally, at 4.1 percent, the unemployment rate is notably higher than a year ago but has flattened out in recent months and remains historically low. InflationThe labor market has cooled to the point where it is no longer a source of significant inflationary pressures. This cooling and the substantial improvement in broader supply conditions have brought inflation down significantly over the past two years from its mid-2022 peak above 7 percent. Progress on inflation has been broad based. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data released this week indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in October and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. Core measures of goods and services inflation, excluding housing, fell rapidly over the past two years and have returned to rates closer to those consistent with our goals. We expect that these rates will continue to fluctuate in their recent ranges. We are watching carefully to be sure that they do, however, just as we are closely tracking the gradual decline in housing services inflation, which has yet to fully normalize. Inflation is running much closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal, but it is not there yet. We are committed to finishing the job. With labor market conditions in rough balance and inflation expectations well anchored, I expect inflation to continue to come down toward our 2 percent objective, albeit on a sometimes-bumpy path. Monetary PolicyGiven progress toward our inflation goal and the cooling of labor market conditions, last week my Federal Open Market Committee colleagues and I took another step in reducing the degree of policy restraint by lowering our policy interest rate 1/4 percentage point. We are confident that with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the economy and the labor market can be maintained, with inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent. We see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as being roughly in balance, and we are attentive to the risks to both sides. We know that reducing policy restraint too quickly could hinder progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too slowly could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. We are moving policy over time to a more neutral setting. But the path for getting there is not preset. In considering additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, we will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The economy is not sending any signals that we need to be in a hurry to lower rates. The strength we are currently seeing in the economy gives us the ability to approach our decisions carefully. Ultimately, the path of the policy rate will depend on how the incoming data and the economic outlook evolve. We remain resolute in our commitment to the dual mandate given to us by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. Our aim has been to return inflation to our objective without the kind of painful rise in unemployment that has often accompanied past efforts to bring down high inflation. That would be a highly desirable result for the communities, families, and businesses we serve. While the task is not complete, we have made a good deal of progress toward that outcome. Thank you, and I look forward to our discussion.
Governor Lisa D. Cook At the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia Thank you, Christa. It is wonderful to be with you here on the University of Virginia's beautiful campus. This is my first visit here as an adult. As a child, I was fortunate enough to be able to attend the commencement ceremony of my aunt and uncle, who received their doctoral degrees from UVA several decades ago. My family and I are grateful to the University of Virginia for all the educational opportunities it has afforded us over the years. I look forward to connecting with many of the exceptional students and faculty during my visit.1 As a member of the Federal Reserve Board, I always find it a pleasure to hear from people in communities across the country and to share some views of my own. At the Fed, I am committed to pursuing the best policy to achieve the dual-mandate goals given to us by Congress of maximum employment and price stability. Today, I would like to share with you my outlook for the economy, including some international comparisons of productivity and inflation, and offer my views on U.S. monetary policy. Broadly, I view the economy as being in a good position. Inflation has substantially eased from its peak in mid-2022, though core inflation remains somewhat elevated. Unemployment remains historically low, but the labor market is no longer overheated. Economic growth has been robust this year, and I forecast the expansion will continue. Looking ahead, I remain confident that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent objective, even if the path is occasionally bumpy. Meanwhile, I see employment risks as weighted to the downside, but those risks appear to have diminished somewhat in recent months. InflationInflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, has eased notably from a peak of 7.2 percent in June 2022. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data released last week indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in October. Core PCE prices—which exclude the volatile food and energy categories—increased 2.8 percent, down from a peak of 5.6 percent in February 2022. Despite this significant progress on disinflation, the elevated core figure suggests that we have further to go before credibly achieving our inflation target of 2 percent. Although most price indicators suggest that progress is ongoing, I anticipate bumps along the road. For instance, when measured on a monthly basis, estimated core PCE inflation stepped up in September and October after four months of lower readings. Even so, I still see headline and core inflation falling to 2.2 percent next year and to lower levels after that. Moreover, disinflation has been widespread across a broad range of goods and services. Taken together, recent data support my view that the disinflationary process is continuing. Thinking of the components of inflation, core goods and core services inflation excluding housing are now at rates consistent with previous periods when inflation averaged about 2 percent. As a result, housing services account for most of the excess of core inflation over our target. Despite a slowing in rent increases for new tenants over the past two years, recent research from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland suggests that existing rents for continuing tenants may still be notably below new tenant rent levels.2Existing rents rising toward market rent levels is keeping housing services inflation temporarily elevated. My view is that housing services inflation will come down gradually over the next two years as the earlier slowing of growth in new tenant rent feeds through into the overall rate. Recently, other inflation factors have been subdued. Core import prices have continued to step down from the surprisingly strong pace in the first half of the year. Global oil prices have fluctuated, largely in response to developments in the Middle East, but are back near the lows reached in late summer. My confidence in continued disinflation is further reinforced by the moderation in wage growth. The employment cost index report showed that hourly compensation for private-sector workers rose at a 2.9 percent annual rate in the third quarter, the lowest since 2021. The 12-month change in average hourly earnings in October was 4 percent, down from 4.3 percent during the previous year. The wage premium for job switchers, a significant contributor to wage growth early in the pandemic recovery, has largely disappeared, according to data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Labor MarketTurning to the labor market, on balance, recent data suggest that it remains solid. Monthly increases in firms' payrolls have slowed from earlier this year but are consistent with only a gradual cooling in the labor market. The October employment report did show a sharp slowdown in job creation, but that was largely due to the temporary effects of recent hurricanes and a labor strike. While economists and forecasters often focus on aggregate data for the national economy, it is important to acknowledge that hurricanes Helene and Milton resulted in the tragic loss of life and devastating destruction in many parts of the country, including some here in the state of Virginia. My thoughts remain with those affected communities. The Federal Reserve System remains in touch with these communities to help the financial institutions that serve them in any way we can.3 The broader trend I see is that national job growth is solid but perhaps not quite strong enough to keep unemployment at the current low rate. Net hiring so far this year is running somewhat below estimates for what economists call the breakeven pace, or the rate of hiring needed to keep the unemployment rate constant, when accounting for changes to the size of the labor force. With job growth coming in below the breakeven pace, which was likely more than 200,000 jobs a month over the past year, the unemployment rate has risen from a historical low of 3.4 percent in April 2023 to 4.1 percent in October. Other data are also consistent with a gradual cooling in labor demand. The vacancies-to-unemployment ratio has fallen from a peak of 2.0 in 2022 to 1.1 in September, slightly below where it stood just before the pandemic. The rate at which workers are quitting their jobs continued to slide in recent months to well below its pre-pandemic level, which could indicate that workers are less optimistic about finding a better job should they leave their current role. Notably, firms' hiring rates and hiring plans remain subdued, while workers report reduced availability of jobs. Although layoffs remain low, less hiring makes it harder for labor market entrants and reentrants to find jobs. Also, our contacts report that employers are being more selective, waiting to find workers with the skills they seek, rather than pursuing a hire-and-train strategy. Overall, I see a labor market that has largely normalized after being overheated because of pandemic disruptions and dislocations. The labor market is in a good position—with the supply and demand for workers being roughly in balance—such that it is no longer a source of inflationary pressure in the economy. I will continue to watch incoming data carefully and remain attuned to signs of undesirable further cooling in the labor market. Economic Output and Productivity GrowthAlong with generally solid labor market data and moderating inflation, recent indicators show economic activity moving along at a strong pace. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a 2.8 percent annual rate in the third quarter, consistent with the solid growth recorded in the first half of the year. American consumers remain resilient, with broad-based gains in household spending on both goods and services. This supports broader economic growth because consumer spending constitutes roughly two-thirds of GDP. Spending at retailers and restaurants rose 2.8 percent in October from a year earlier, a faster 12-month rate of increase than the prior two months. Recent data revisions show that household income and savings have been higher than previously thought, improving the outlook for consumer spending and GDP growth. It is remarkable that the U.S. economy has been growing rapidly even as inflation has been declining significantly over the past two years. One reason why this solid growth could be occurring is that potential growth, or the maximum rate at which an economy can grow without causing inflation over the medium term, may have increased. One factor that appears to have supported both potential and actual growth is a faster pace of productivity gains. Recent data indicate labor productivity has grown at a 1.8 percent annual rate since the end of 2019, surpassing its 1.5 percent growth rate over the previous 12 years. Several forces could have boosted productivity in recent years. As I discussed in a recent speech in South Carolina, the U.S. experienced a surge in new business formation since the start of the pandemic.4These newer firms are more likely to innovate and adopt new technologies and business processes, thus boosting productivity. Two other factors boosting productivity relate in part to changes in the U.S. economy during and after the pandemic. Worker reallocation across jobs and locations surged early in the pandemic and remained high for some time. There is some research suggesting that such reallocation resulted in better and more productive matches between some workers and jobs, thus raising labor productivity.5At the same time, severe labor shortages during the post-pandemic recovery spurred many businesses to invest in labor-saving technologies and to restructure aspects of production more efficiently, which may also have given at least a one-time boost to productivity. More broadly, the continued sizable investment in new technologies may promote ongoing strength in productivity growth. Much of this investment has gone toward artificial intelligence (AI), which has the potential to transform many aspects of the economy and job market, as I discussed in speeches earlier this fall.6,7 International ComparisonsCompared with productivity abroad, recent U.S. productivity growth looks quite exceptional. As shown infigure 1, before the pandemic, the U.S. had faster productivity growth—as shown by the green portion of the bars—than other advanced economies, but the difference was small. Since the pandemic, however, U.S. productivity growth has far exceeded that of Europe, Canada, and Australia, as shown infigure 2. To explain this notable outperformance, some have highlighted our country's relatively flexible labor market and greater business dynamism compared with these other economies.8Moreover, to the extent that investment in technology has been a driver of cross-country differences, it is notable that private investment in AI has been much higher in the U.S. than abroad.9 This productivity outperformance is likely a main reason why U.S. GDP growth has been stronger than that of foreign economies; the path of inflation, however, has largely been similar across the globe. As shown infigure 3, inflation in the U.S. and abroad rose sharply in 2021 and 2022, amid supply bottlenecks and a post-pandemic recovery in demand. Inflation reached a higher peak in European economies that were most directly affected by the energy price shock from Russia's war in Ukraine. Inflation has since declined globally as supply normalized and monetary policy tightening restrained demand. U.S. inflation, as shown by the black line, is nearly back to its 2 percent target level, while core inflation, as shown infigure 4, has come down but remains somewhat above 2 percent. Monetary PolicyAs I stated, the totality of the data suggests that a disinflationary trajectory is still in place and that the labor market is gradually cooling. As such, I view the risks to achieving the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability as being roughly in balance. Consistent with those balanced risks, in my view, it likely will be appropriate to move the policy rate toward a more neutral stance over time. My colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and I acted earlier this month to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point. That action came after we reduced the rate by 1/2 percentage point in September. Together, these moves were a strong step toward removing policy restriction. Going forward, I still see the direction of the appropriate policy rate path to be downward, but the magnitude and timing of rate cuts will depend on incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. I do not view policy as being on a preset course, and I am ready to respond to a changing outlook. In fact, I find it helpful to consider a range of scenarios when thinking about the path of policy. If the labor market and inflation continue to progress in line with my forecast, it could well be appropriate to lower the level of policy restriction over time until we near the neutral rate of interest, or the point when monetary policy is neither stimulating nor restricting economic growth. However, if inflation progress slows and the labor market remains solid, I could see a scenario where we pause along the downward path. Alternatively, should the labor market weaken in a substantial way, it could be appropriate to ease policy more quickly. My policy decisions will be guided by our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices, and I know delivering on those goals will produce the best economic outcomes for all Americans. Thank you for having me here today. I look forward to your questions. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text 2. See Lara Loewenstein, Jason Meyer, and Randal J. Verbrugge (2024),"New-Tenant Rent Passthrough and the Future of Rent Inflation,"Economic Commentary 2024-17 (Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, October).Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and State Financial Regulators (2024),"Federal and State Financial Regulatory Agencies Issue Interagency Statement on Supervisory Practices regarding Financial Institutions Affected by Hurricane Helene,"joint press release. See also Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Florida Office of Financial Regulation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2024),"Federal and State Financial Regulatory Agencies Issue Interagency Statement on Supervisory Practices regarding Financial Institutions Affected by Hurricane Milton,"joint press release.Return to text 4. Lisa D. Cook (2024),"Entrepreneurs, Innovation, and Participation,"speech delivered at the 2024 Women for Women Summit, Charleston, S.C., October 10.Return to text 5. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023),"The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market,"NBER Working Paper Series 31010 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March; revised May 2024).Return to text 6. See Lisa D. Cook,"Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, and the Path Ahead for Productivity,"speech delivered at "Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications of AI, Big Data, and Remote Work," a conference organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Richmond, Atlanta, Georgia, held in Atlanta, Ga., October 1.Return to text 7. See Lisa D. Cook,"What Will Artificial Intelligence Mean for America's Workers?"speech delivered at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, September 26.Return to text 8. See François de Soyres, Joaquin Garcia-Cabo Herrero, Nils Goernemann, Sharon Jeon, Grace Lofstrom, and Dylan Moore (2024),"Why is the U.S. GDP Recovering Faster than other Advanced Economies?"FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 17).Return to text 9. See Chirag Chopra, Ankit Kasare, and Piyush Gupta (2024), "How Venture Capital is Investing in AI in the Top Five Global Economies—and Shaping the AI Ecosystem,"World Economic Forum,May 24.Return to text Accessible Version
The Federal Reserve on Friday announced additional information about the periodic review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications—the framework it uses to pursue its congressionally-assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability. The review is focused on two specific areas: the Federal Open Market Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which articulates the Committee's approach to monetary policy; and the Committee's policy communications tools. The Committee's two percent longer-run inflation goal will not be a focus of the review. "We are open to new ideas and critical feedback and will take onboard lessons from the last five years and adapt our approach where appropriate to best serve the American people, to whom we are accountable," said Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell. Like the review that concluded in 2020, the upcoming review will include outreach and public events with a wide range of parties. As part of the outreach effort, the Federal Reserve Board will host a research conference on May 15-16, 2025, with speakers and panelists from outside the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve will continue to hostFed Listenspublic events around the country, and discussions among Federal Reserve policymakers will begin with the January 28-29, 2025, FOMC meeting. At the end of the process, policymakers will assess the information and perspectives gathered during the review and report their findings. The Fed's first review began in 2019 and concluded in summer 2020. For media inquiries, please e-mail[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
Princeton University won the 21st annual nationalCollege Fed Challengeon Friday, a team competition that encourages undergraduate students to learn about the U.S. economy, monetary policymaking, and the role of the Federal Reserve System. Teams analyze economic and financial conditions and formulate a monetary policy recommendation, modeling the Federal Open Market Committee. The team, from Princeton, New Jersey, represented the Philadelphia District and included Bracklinn Williams, Daniel Sozanski, Eleanor Clemans-Cope, Elliot Lee, William Neumann, Bijaan Noormohamed (alternate), and Manuel Garcia San Millan (alternate). The team's advisers were Alan Blinder, Carolyn Wilkins, and William Dudley. This year's College Fed Challenge included119 schoolsfrom across the nation. Each submitted video presentations or participated in local competitions last month. Eighteen semi-finalist teams then participated in question-and-answer sessions held earlier this month, and six finalists were selected to determine the winners. The other national finalists were Harvard College in second place and University of Virginia in third place. Teams with honorable mentions include University of Michigan, Pace University, and University of Miami. "Fed Challenge gives undergraduate students a chance to learn about the Fed and monetary policy," said Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell. "Fed policymakers carefully consider incoming economic data and work together to determine the best policy to pursue our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Through the Fed Challenge experience, students go through similar deliberations and gain a better understanding of the economy and the Fed's role in it." Teams were evaluated on their economic analysis, responses to the judges' questions, teamwork, and presentations. The judges for the final round were Lisheng Su, lead risk management specialist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago; Brian Doyle, deputy director of the Board's Division of International Finance; and Robert Tetlow, a senior adviser in the Board's Division of Monetary Affairs. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Note: On November 22, 2024, Princeton University’s alternate team members were added to the press release.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced its approval of the application by United Bankshares, Inc., of Charleston, West Virginia, to acquire Piedmont Bancorp, Inc., and thereby indirectly acquire The Piedmont Bank, both of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. The Board also gave its approval for United Bank, of Fairfax, Virginia, to merge with The Piedmont Bank and establish and operate branches at The Piedmont Bank's locations. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call (202) 452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Friday announced pricing, effective January 1, 2025, for payment services the Federal Reserve Banks provide to banks and credit unions, such as the clearing of checks, automated clearing house (ACH) transactions, instant payments, and wholesale payment and settlement services. By law, the Federal Reserve must establish fees to recover the costs, including imputed costs, of providing payment services over the long run. The Federal Reserve expects to recover 104.1 percent of actual and imputed expenses in 2025, including the return on equity that would have been earned if a private-sector firm provided the services. Overall, the Reserve Banks estimate that the price changes for 2025 will result in a 2.8 percent average price increase for established, mature services. Along with the pricing information, the Board also released transaction volume and value data for FedNow, the Federal Reserve's 24x7x365 instant payments service. The data show that adoption continues to grow, with modest volumes that are in line with the introduction of a new payments service. The entire 2025 fee schedule is included in theFederal Registernotice and will also be published on FRBservices.org®. Additional information on the Federal Reserve's payments services, including service usage statistics, is available on theBoard's website. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Federal Registernotice: Federal Reserve Bank Services (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Wednesday invited comment on a report, as prescribed by law, that discusses the impact of a proposed international capital standard for large, internationally active insurance groups on U.S. consumers and markets. The joint report was completed with the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Comments on the report are due by January 12, 2025. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. The Impact of the International Insurance Capital Standard on Consumers and Markets in the United States (PDF) Federal Registernotice: Study and Report to Congress on the Impact on Consumers and Markets in the United States of a Final International Insurance Capital Standard
The Federal Reserve Board on Thursday announced that it had prohibited Shan Hanes from future participation in the banking industry. Hanes is the former chief executive officer of Heartland Tri-State Bank and used his position to embezzle $47.1 million of bank funds in a cryptocurrency scheme that led to the bank becoming insolvent and failing in July 2023. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955.
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced that it had prohibited Anthony R. Gressak III from future participation in the banking industry and fined him $75,000. Gressak is a former director and former interim chief executive officer of Nano Financial Holdings, Inc. and Nano Banc. In his former role, Gressak violated a prior written agreement between the firm and the Federal Reserve. Gressak also fraudulently obtained loans and grants administered under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act and violated other laws and banking regulations. The Board also announced that it had prohibited James T. Chung, also a former director of Nano Financial Holdings, Inc. and Nano Banc, from future participation in the banking industry for fraudulently obtaining loans and grants administered under the CARES Act. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday announced the execution of the enforcement actions listed below: Small Business Bank, Lenexa, KansasCease and Desist Order dated November 13, 2024 Industry Bancshares, Inc., Industry, TexasCease and Desist Order dated November 13, 2024 Additional enforcement actions can be searched forhere. For media inquiries, please email[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Attachment 1 (PDF) Attachment 2 (PDF)
The Federal Reserve on Tuesday released the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting that was held on November 6–7, 2024. The minutes for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee are generally published three weeks after the day of the policy decision. The descriptions of economic and financial conditions contained in these minutes are based solely on the information that was available to the Committee at the time of the meeting. The minutes can be viewed on the Board'swebsite. For media inquiries, e-mail[email protected]or call 202-452-2955. Minutes of the Federal Open Market CommitteeNovember 6-7, 2024:HTML|PDF
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Accompanying my testimony is the Federal Reserve's semiannualSupervision and Regulation Report. Today, I will discuss current conditions in the banking sector, and our recent supervisory and regulatory activities. Banking ConditionsOverall, the banking system remains sound and resilient. Banks continue to report capital and liquidity ratios above minimum regulatory levels, and asset quality generally remains sound. Bank lending has continued to grow, albeit at a modest pace that reflects decreased demand and tighter lending standards than we have seen since early last year. Capital ratios have increased this year, building on the capital increases from the year before and leaving the system better positioned to weather potential losses. This is supported by this year's stress test results, which showed that large banks have sufficient capital to meet their minimum capital ratios and continue their operations under a highly stressful scenario. Liquidity conditions overall are stable. Notably, deposits and liquid assets on bank balance sheets remained steady in the first half of the year. Additionally, the share of uninsured deposits in the system continued to decline, falling to a level last seen in 2019. While the system as a whole is resilient, we are carefully monitoring the continued rise in delinquency rates among certain commercial real estate loans—such as those backed by offices, especially in major cities, and, more recently, those backed by multifamily housing. Delinquency rates for certain consumer loans are also elevated. In response to rising delinquencies, banks have increased loan loss provisions. Cybersecurity risk also continues to be a supervisory priority. The Federal Reserve's supervisory activities in this area promote financial institutions' ability to protect against cyber incidents, safeguard critical infrastructure, and address emerging technology risks. SupervisionFederal Reserve supervisors continue to work diligently to assess all bank risk-management practices to be prepared for both expected and unexpected stresses. We continue to make progress on improving the speed, force, and agility of supervision to align better with the risks, size, and complexity of supervised banks, as appropriate. This is necessary to ensure that banks and supervisors are managing the types of risks highlighted by last year's stress in the banking system. Supervisors must be prepared to take timely action as risks build up; deploy supervisory tools and escalation effectively; account for changes in market, economic, and financial conditions in their examination priorities and supervisory conclusions; and identify new and different patterns of risks. We have made progress on these goals. First, we are working to ensure that supervision intensifies at the right pace as a bank grows in size and complexity. Second, we are modifying supervisory processes so that once issues are identified, they are addressed more quickly by both banks and supervisors. Third, we are finding ways to better incorporate forward-looking risk analysis into supervision. RegulationMoving to regulation, as you know, last summer, the Board sought comment on two proposed rules that would modify risk-based capital requirements for large banks: the Basel III Endgame proposal and the proposal to adjust the capital surcharge for the largest and most complex banks. We asked for and received a great number of comments on all aspects of the proposals and, earlier this year, I laid out potential adjustments to these proposals based on those comments. Last year, the bank regulatory agencies also invited comment on a proposal to require large banks to issue and maintain a minimum amount of long-term debt. We received feedback from commenters on potential adjustments to the proposal, which are under consideration. And, as I have mentioned in previous speeches, we have been considering ways to improve liquidity resilience and improve banks' ability to respond to funding shocks. These initiatives have been joint efforts among the Federal Reserve, FDIC, and OCC, and we look forward to that continued collaboration next year. We will continue to seek an approach that helps to ensure financial system resilience and supports the flow of credit to households and businesses through the economic cycle. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions.
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Accompanying my testimony is the Federal Reserve's semiannualSupervision and Regulation Report. Today, I will discuss current conditions in the banking sector, and our recent supervisory and regulatory activities. Banking ConditionsOverall, the banking system remains sound and resilient. Banks continue to report capital and liquidity ratios above minimum regulatory levels, and asset quality generally remains sound. Bank lending has continued to grow, albeit at a modest pace that reflects decreased demand and tighter lending standards than we have seen since early last year. Capital ratios have increased this year, building on the capital increases from the year before and leaving the system better positioned to weather potential losses. This is supported by this year's stress test results, which showed that large banks have sufficient capital to meet their minimum capital ratios and continue their operations under a highly stressful scenario. Liquidity conditions overall are stable. Notably, deposits and liquid assets on bank balance sheets remained steady in the first half of the year. Additionally, the share of uninsured deposits in the system continued to decline, falling to a level last seen in 2019. While the system as a whole is resilient, we are carefully monitoring the continued rise in delinquency rates among certain commercial real estate loans—such as those backed by offices, especially in major cities, and, more recently, those backed by multifamily housing. Delinquency rates for certain consumer loans are also elevated. In response to rising delinquencies, banks have increased loan loss provisions. Cybersecurity risk also continues to be a supervisory priority. The Federal Reserve's supervisory activities in this area promote financial institutions' ability to protect against cyber incidents, safeguard critical infrastructure, and address emerging technology risks. SupervisionFederal Reserve supervisors continue to work diligently to assess all bank risk-management practices to be prepared for both expected and unexpected stresses. We continue to make progress on improving the speed, force, and agility of supervision to align better with the risks, size, and complexity of supervised banks, as appropriate. This is necessary to ensure that banks and supervisors are managing the types of risks highlighted by last year's stress in the banking system. Supervisors must be prepared to take timely action as risks build up; deploy supervisory tools and escalation effectively; account for changes in market, economic, and financial conditions in their examination priorities and supervisory conclusions; and identify new and different patterns of risks. We have made progress on these goals. First, we are working to ensure that supervision intensifies at the right pace as a bank grows in size and complexity. Second, we are modifying supervisory processes so that once issues are identified, they are addressed more quickly by both banks and supervisors. Third, we are finding ways to better incorporate forward-looking risk analysis into supervision. RegulationMoving to regulation, as you know, last summer, the Board sought comment on two proposed rules that would modify risk-based capital requirements for large banks: the Basel III Endgame proposal and the proposal to adjust the capital surcharge for the largest and most complex banks. We asked for and received a great number of comments on all aspects of the proposals and, earlier this year, I laid out potential adjustments to these proposals based on those comments. Last year, the bank regulatory agencies also invited comment on a proposal to require large banks to issue and maintain a minimum amount of long-term debt. We received feedback from commenters on potential adjustments to the proposal, which are under consideration. And, as I have mentioned in previous speeches, we have been considering ways to improve liquidity resilience and improve banks' ability to respond to funding shocks. These initiatives have been joint efforts among the Federal Reserve, FDIC, and OCC, and we look forward to that continued collaboration next year. We will continue to seek an approach that helps to ensure financial system resilience and supports the flow of credit to households and businesses through the economic cycle. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions.
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr Before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. Watch Live Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and regulatory activities. Accompanying my testimony is the Federal Reserve's semiannualSupervision and Regulation Report. Today, I will discuss current conditions in the banking sector, and our recent supervisory and regulatory activities. Banking ConditionsOverall, the banking system remains sound and resilient. Banks continue to report capital and liquidity ratios above minimum regulatory levels, and asset quality generally remains sound. Bank lending has continued to grow, albeit at a modest pace that reflects decreased demand and tighter lending standards than we have seen since early last year. Capital ratios have increased this year, building on the capital increases from the year before and leaving the system better positioned to weather potential losses. This is supported by this year's stress test results, which showed that large banks have sufficient capital to meet their minimum capital ratios and continue their operations under a highly stressful scenario. Liquidity conditions overall are stable. Notably, deposits and liquid assets on bank balance sheets remained steady in the first half of the year. Additionally, the share of uninsured deposits in the system continued to decline, falling to a level last seen in 2019. While the system as a whole is resilient, we are carefully monitoring the continued rise in delinquency rates among certain commercial real estate loans—such as those backed by offices, especially in major cities, and, more recently, those backed by multifamily housing. Delinquency rates for certain consumer loans are also elevated. In response to rising delinquencies, banks have increased loan loss provisions. Cybersecurity risk also continues to be a supervisory priority. The Federal Reserve's supervisory activities in this area promote financial institutions' ability to protect against cyber incidents, safeguard critical infrastructure, and address emerging technology risks. SupervisionFederal Reserve supervisors continue to work diligently to assess all bank risk-management practices to be prepared for both expected and unexpected stresses. We continue to make progress on improving the speed, force, and agility of supervision to align better with the risks, size, and complexity of supervised banks, as appropriate. This is necessary to ensure that banks and supervisors are managing the types of risks highlighted by last year's stress in the banking system. Supervisors must be prepared to take timely action as risks build up; deploy supervisory tools and escalation effectively; account for changes in market, economic, and financial conditions in their examination priorities and supervisory conclusions; and identify new and different patterns of risks. We have made progress on these goals. First, we are working to ensure that supervision intensifies at the right pace as a bank grows in size and complexity. Second, we are modifying supervisory processes so that once issues are identified, they are addressed more quickly by both banks and supervisors. Third, we are finding ways to better incorporate forward-looking risk analysis into supervision. RegulationMoving to regulation, as you know, last summer, the Board sought comment on two proposed rules that would modify risk-based capital requirements for large banks: the Basel III Endgame proposal and the proposal to adjust the capital surcharge for the largest and most complex banks. We asked for and received a great number of comments on all aspects of the proposals and, earlier this year, I laid out potential adjustments to these proposals based on those comments. Last year, the bank regulatory agencies also invited comment on a proposal to require large banks to issue and maintain a minimum amount of long-term debt. We received feedback from commenters on potential adjustments to the proposal, which are under consideration. And, as I have mentioned in previous speeches, we have been considering ways to improve liquidity resilience and improve banks' ability to respond to funding shocks. These initiatives have been joint efforts among the Federal Reserve, FDIC, and OCC, and we look forward to that continued collaboration next year. We will continue to seek an approach that helps to ensure financial system resilience and supports the flow of credit to households and businesses through the economic cycle. Thank you. I am happy to take your questions.
Governor Christopher J. Waller At The Clearing House Annual Conference 2024, New York, New York Thank you for inviting me to speak here today.1The Clearing House is a great place to talk about the evolution of clearing and settlement of payments in the United States. The key question I want to address today is, what roles should the private sector and the Federal Reserve play in payments? As a strong believer in the benefits of a capitalist system, I hold the view that it is generally the private sector that can most reliably and efficiently provide goods and services to the economy. And I apply this view to the payments ecosystem. It is that perspective that underlies a question I often ask when forming my positions on the appropriate role the Federal Reserve should play in a wide variety of initiatives: What is the fundamental market inefficiency that would be solved by government intervention and can only be solved by government intervention? If there isn't a satisfactory answer, then I believe government shouldn't intervene in private markets. Does this mean I believe the Federal Reserve should not be involved in payments? No. While I generally believe that government shouldn't directly compete with the private sector, there are situations where government involvement is needed to solve for market inefficiencies that may arise because of things like incomplete markets, coordination problems, or a lack of resilience. As a policymaker, I have applied that same question to issues ranging from bank regulation to monetary policy. For an example in the payments area, three years ago there was an increase in public discussion about creating a new payment instrument called a central bank digital currency (CBDC). The Federal Reserve Board was compiling a report and seeking public comment on the potential benefits and risks of the idea. In a speech I gave in August 2021, I asked, what problem would a CBDC solve? In other words, what market failure or inefficiency demands this specific intervention?2In more than three years, I have yet to hear a satisfactory answer as applied to CBDC. Given today's audience and my position serving as the chair of the Board's payments committees, I want to focus on the important roles the private sector and the Federal Reserve play in our ever-evolving payment system. To set the stage for that discussion, I think it is helpful to recap some history around payments and clearing in the United States.3 In the early decades following the country's founding, banks generally had state charters. While state banknotes and checks circulated locally as payment instruments, there were difficulties clearing and settling checks across states. One way of describing this is to say that the early U.S. payment system suffered from incomplete markets. The Second Bank of the United States was created in 1816 and, due to its federal charter, it was able to create a national system for clearing checks and banknotes. This in turn led to a more complete national clearing and settlement process. When the charter for the Second Bank lapsed, clearing and settlement of banknotes and checks fell back to state-chartered banks. Many of the earlier inefficiencies resurfaced. For example, porters in New York City would deliver checks and exchange them for gold or other coins and then transport that "specie" to the payee. Hauling these money bags around New York posed obvious risks, and these risks multiplied by the mid-19th century when the number of banks in New York grew rapidly. As this audience is well aware, the New York Clearing House Association (NYCH) was founded in 1853 and served as a central location for the clearing process, which soon evolved, with certificates replacing coins. Furthermore, by being part of a common infrastructure, all members had a reasonably good idea of the quality of each other's balance sheets. In modern economic language, the NYCH became a coordination mechanism that improved clearing by getting banks to clear and settle payments in a well-organized manner. It also reduced asymmetric information about the quality of member balance sheets. By performing this function for New York banks, which constituted a relatively large share of the U.S. financial system, the clearing and settling of payments improved nationally. In this sense, the NYCH was the closest thing the United States had at that time to a central bank.4 While this was an improvement, not all important financial intermediaries were members of the NYCH or other such private arrangements. That is, there were gaps. And financial panics, sometimes driven by gaps and problems in check clearing, were a regular feature of the latter 19th and early 20th century. The Panic of 1907 was a classic example of that. Depositors and investors lost confidence in certain New York banks that had been combined into large, complex, and opaque trust companies that were not members of the NYCH. This resulted in runs on those trusts, which led to broader liquidity problems. Although the NYCH had the ability to provide liquidity to those trusts, the provision of that liquidity was delayed. It appears that at the time, the NYCH was, reasonably, observing some form of Bagehot's dictum when deciding whether to provide liquidity. Under that dictum, you want to know that the institution to which you're providing liquidity is solvent. If it isn't, then the liquidity extension could be akin to throwing good money after bad. But because the trust companies at the time weren't member institutions, the clearinghouse didn't have a good enough understanding of their balance sheets to know whether they were solvent.5Some banks refused to clear checks from other institutions, which led to an erosion of depositor confidence and more failures. This historical example points to another aspect of a payment system that is important—resilience of the system. These problems highlighted by the 1907 panic—coordination failures and a lack of resilience—could have been mitigated with the help of a central bank. Paul Warburg, an influential banker at the time, argued that such a central bank could "establish and maintain a perfect system of credit, enabling the general banks to transform cash credits into actual cash with such absolute ease and certainty that the use of cash credit, instead of actual cash, will not cease, no matter what may happen."6 In 1913, Congress agreed and created the Federal Reserve. It positioned the Federal Reserve at the center of the banking system by establishing a nationwide check-clearing system and a telegraph wire transfer service that is now known as Fedwire®. The Fed was also intended to function as a lender of last resort so that suspension of payments would no longer be necessary. In the 1970s, the Fed promoted more efficient check-clearing by adding the automated clearinghouse service. Our job in providing these services and carrying out our responsibilities was and continues to be to make sure the payment system functions efficiently and resiliently, promoting the kind of confidence that is vital for a modern economy. The lesson from this history, as relevant now as ever, is that the payment system has been one of those areas in which the best efforts of the private sector have sometimes fallen short. The decentralized and diverse nature of banks in the United States is a feature that goes back to the 1800s and has the merits of promoting competition and a vibrant economy. However, when engaging in clearing and settling payments, coordination problems and information asymmetries across banks can be, and were, destabilizing. While the private sector made advances in resolving those issues, the Panic of 1907 showed that those steps were not sufficient. As successful as the NYCH was for its members, it could not protect its members and the economy from risks in the growing share of finance occurring outside its walls. This contributed to the motivation to establish the Federal Reserve and its role in payments. Fast forward to today, and we are once again in an era of rapid change and innovation in money and payments. Some of this will not pan out. Some of this change is about delivering services already available but doing so with new technologies. And some of it is leveraging new technology to rethink existing payment, clearing, and settlement structures. How will all of this come together? And what will be the respective roles of the private sector and the Federal Reserve? Let's break it down, keeping in mind my principle that the Federal Reserve should focus on addressing issues that the private sector cannot address alone and, in doing so, promote an efficient and resilient U.S. payment system. I'll start by discussing the important roles that the private sector now plays in the payment system and in the evolution of payments under way. The private sector connects consumers and businesses to the payment system, with financial institutions competing to provide services to their customers. Such competition can lead to better products and services for consumers as profit-seeking competitors look for opportunities to win over customers including through the adoption of new technologies. I have noted my concern that some see these new technologies as an opportunity for the public sector to play abiggerrole in payments, which may crowd out private investment. I believe this would be a policy mistake and a better approach is one in which the private sector continues to have a significant footprint, with the role of government limited. One important reason for that is that the private sector, through competition, is typically best situated to sort out good ideas from bad ideas, rather than central banks or other public-sector institutions choosing winners and losers. At the early stages of innovation, the true value-added of the application of new technologies is murky. Market competition helps sort that out and typically leads to a wider range of products that can be better suited to the needs of consumers. But just as was the case in the time of Warburg, there remain problems in payments that can't be fully resolved by the private sector. And just as we have done throughout history, the Federal Reserve stands ready to support the evolution in payments and do so primarily through our operational role in the payment system, by providing core clearing and settlement infrastructure on which the private sector can innovate. Notably, the Fed has the unique ability to provide the infrastructure to reliably settle interbank obligations using balances at the central bank, which enhances the stability of the banking system and the broader economy, reflecting the lessons learned in 1907 and through earlier banking panics. Compared with many other countries where a small number of large banks dominate, the United States has thousands of banks and credit unions. Connecting those many organizations to a payment network requires a significant amount of coordination. One recent example of an area in which we're playing such a coordination role is in instant payments. The role we're playing with FedNow is to help with that coordination problem using our existing connections to those thousands of institutions. And that approach is consistent with my overall view of the appropriate role of government—to narrowly address problems like those of coordination that can't always be efficiently solved by the private sector alone. In doing so, we complement the private sector and promote responsible and efficient innovation in the broader market. With respect to new and emerging technologies in finance, I can think of two ways in which the private sector is uniquely positioned to develop and deploy them while the government is not well suited to do so. First is the question of innovation risk—the investment in new payment technologies is large and comes with risk of failure. Private-sector entities, risking their own funds and seeking to turn a profit, will have a greater incentive to accurately gauge demand for these technologies and bring those products to market faster. Second, despite the current fascination around the world with industrial policy, rarely can the government match the ability of the private sector to efficiently allocate resources and explore how well new technologies can address actual shortcomings in the current payment system. It is too early to tell whether some of the new technologies will relieve significant frictions in the payment system, but it is going to be the private sector, betting with its own money, that is best positioned to explore this question. If problems emerge, as they did with check clearing in the 19th century, then government can play a constructive role in overcoming them. Well before this point, however, it makes sense for the public and private sectors to look down the road together and engage in dialogue about potential issues and opportunities that might arise. For example, through the Bank for International Settlements, the Fed is engaged with the private sector to explore how tokenization technology might be used to facilitate cross-border payments in a faster and cheaper manner. This project brings together multiple central banks and private-sector financial firms in collaboration to potentially facilitate a better-functioning monetary system.7That process of working together to promote the efficiency and safety of the payment system, as the Federal Reserve has done for decades, can lead to outcomes that benefit households, businesses, and the overall economy. American entrepreneurship and technical prowess have generated exciting innovations in payments, and they will continue to do so. The role of the Federal Reserve is to support that initiative and engage with the private sector to promote innovation while guarding against risks to financial stability. We've managed this balancing act before and will continue to do so. And, together, we will ensure that the payments ecosystem continues to move forward for the benefit of households and businesses. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board.Return to text 2. See Christopher J. Waller (2021), "CBDC: A Solution in Search of a Problem?" speech delivered at the American Enterprise Institute, Washington (via webcast), August 5.Return to text 3. I am drawing on material in Stephen Quinn and William Roberds (2008), "The Evolution of the Check as a Means of Payment: A Historical Survey," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,Economic Review,vol. 93 (4), pp. 1–28.Return to text 4. See Eugene Nelson White (2016),The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900–1929(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).Return to text 5. See Jon R. Moen and Ellis W. Tallman (1999), "Why Didn't the United States Establish a Central Bank until after the Panic of 1907?" Working Paper Series 99-16 (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, November)Return to text 6. See Paul M. Warburg (1911), "A United Reserve Bank of the United States,"Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science in the City of New York,vol. 1 (January), pp. 302–42.Return to text 7. See Bank for International Settlements (2024), "Private Sector Partners Join Project Agorá," webpage, September 16.Return to text